

===== PAGE 1 =====

A Survey of Models for Cognitive Diagnosis: New
Developments and Future Directions
FEI WANG, WEIBO GAO, QI LIU, JIATONG LI, GUANHAO ZHAO, ZHENG ZHANG,
and ZHENYA HUANG, State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, University of Science and Tech-
nology of China, China
MENGXIAO ZHU, Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Science Education and Communication, University
of Science and Technology of China, China
SHIJIN WANG,iFLYTEK AI Research (Central China), China
WEI TONG, National Educational Examinations Authority, China
ENHONG CHEN, State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, University of Science and Technology
of China, China
Cognitive diagnosis has been developed for decades as an effective measurement tool to evaluate human
cognitive status such as ability level and knowledge mastery. It has been applied to a wide range of fields
including education, sport, psychological diagnosis, etc. By providing better awareness of cognitive status, it
can serve as the basis for personalized services such as well-designed medical treatment, teaching strategy
and vocational training. This paper aims to provide a survey of current models for cognitive diagnosis,
with more attention on new developments using machine learning-based methods. By comparing the model
structures, parameter estimation algorithms, model evaluation methods and applications, we provide a
relatively comprehensive review of the recent trends in cognitive diagnosis models. Further, we discuss future
directions that are worthy of exploration. In addition, we release two Python libraries: EduData for easy access
to some relevant public datasets we have collected, and EduCDM that implements popular CDMs to facilitate
both applications and research purposes.
CCS Concepts: • Applied computing → Computer-assisted instruction ; E-learning; • Social and
professional topics→ Computing education; Computing profession; User characteristics.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Cognitive diagnosis, item response theory, cognitive diagnosis model,
intelligent education, deep learning, survey
ACM Reference Format:
Fei Wang, Weibo Gao, Qi Liu, Jiatong Li, Guanhao Zhao, Zheng Zhang, Zhenya Huang, Mengxiao Zhu, Shijin
Wang, Wei Tong, and Enhong Chen. 2024. A Survey of Models for Cognitive Diagnosis: New Developments
and Future Directions. 1, 1 (July 2024), 37 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
Authors’ addresses: F. Wang, W. Gao, J. Li, G. Zhao, Z. Zhang, Q. Liu, Z. Huang and Enhong Chen, State Key Laboratory
of Cognitive Intelligence, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China; emails: {wf314159, weibogao,
satosasara, ghzhao0223, zhangzheng}@mail.ustc.edu.cn and {qiliuql, huangzhy, cheneh}@ustc.edu.cn; M. Zhu, Anhui
Province Key Laboratory of Science Education and Communication, University of Science and Technology of China; email:
mxzhu@ustc.edu.cn; S. Wang, iFLYTEK AI Research (Central China), Wuhan, China; email: sjwang3@iflytek.com; W. Tong,
National Educational Examinations Authority; email: tongw@mail.neea.edu.cn.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the
full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM XXXX-XXXX/2024/7-ART
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.
arXiv:2407.05458v1  [cs.AI]  7 Jul 2024

===== PAGE 2 =====

2 Fei Wang, et al.
Q1
Q2
Qm
Q1
Q2
Qm
Q1
Q2
Qn
Q1
Q2
Qn
Score：90
Score：82
Test 1
Test 2
?
Measure ability by test scores
 Measure ability by cognitive diagnosis
s1
Items Skills
Responses
    
    
    
    
    ,  
    ,  
Overall score 60 60
Cognitive
Diagnosis
0 0.57 0.61
    
Overall ability
Proficiency levels
  
  
    
    
  
  
    
    
          
  
  
Mastered or unmastered
Different types of diagnostic reports
Fig. 1. Comparison between ability measurement by test scores and by cognitive diagnosis.
1 INTRODUCTION
Measurement is an integral part of modern science as well as of engineering, commerce, and daily life
[123]. Through measurement, we learn quantitatively about the things around us and even human
beings. Cognitive diagnosis, as a representative, aims to measure the cognitive status of individuals,
especially the ability levels such as knowledge structures and processing skills, so as to provide
information about their cognitive strengths and weaknesses [74]. For example, through cognitive
diagnosis, we can learn about whether a student has mastered specific knowledge concepts [74] or
whether a patient is mentally healthy [32]. Therefore, cognitive diagnosis provides informative
results for test developers and test takers, as well as helps with personalized support such as training
course planning for employers and learning resource recommendations for students.
Unlike conventional physical measurement objects such as length and weight, a person’s ability
level is a psychological characteristic not directly observable. Therefore, the fundamental idea of
measuring human ability is by conducting tests and inferring examinees’ ability through their
performance. Francis Galton is thought as the first to apply statistical methods to the study of human
differences and inheritance of intelligence, and proposed the first personality test [117]. Using the
scores obtained in a test is a straightforward way to represent a person’s overall ability level, and is
widely adopted in IQ tests, teaching, etc. However, although test scores reflect examinees’ ability
level to some extent, they are not the ability level themselves. For instance, as demonstrated in the
left part of Fig. 1, a person may get different scores on two tests at the same time, while neither
of them can absolutely represent the correct ability level. By contrast, cognitive diagnosis infers
the ability level hidden in the responses. The complete cognitive diagnosis procedure (especially
traditional cognitive diagnosis) requires multiple steps, including preparatory work such as deciding
the measurement goal, arranging the knowledge structures, and constructing tests. A simplified
procedure is illustrated in the right part of Fig. 1 which includes: 1) Test construction: rigorous
questionnaires or test items (e.g., 𝑄1∼ 𝑄5) can be constructed for response collection in fields
such as education and psychotherapy [ 59]. The relation between items and relevant attributes
(i.e., skills or knowledge concepts) are usually provided by experts. 2) Response data collection:
the responses here mostly refer to binary 0/1 values indicating the results of examinees’ answers
(e.g., incorrect/correct) or discrete scores obtained on the items (e.g., 5 points out of 8). In some
situations, responses are not limited to question answering, for example, the outcome of adversarial
games [56] and law cases [3]. 3) Cognitive diagnosis model (CDM) designing: well-designed CDMs
are an important guarantee of valid diagnostic results. 4) Psychological factor estimation: based on
the collected response data, the psychological factors (e.g., the ability parameters) within CDMs are
estimated. 4) Diagnosis feedback: the diagnosed ability levels are then fed back to the examinees.
The feedback can be different depending on the CDMs, such as overall ability (§3.1), whether or
not mastered certain attributes (§3.2), and proficiency levels of certain attributes (§4.2).
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 3 =====

A Survey of Models for Cognitive Diagnosis: New Developments and Future Directions 3
Q1
Q2
Qn
Q1
Q2
Qn
Q1
Q2
Qn
Q1
Q2
Qn
Unobservable ability
Observable
responses
Test 
items
Cognitive 
process
Simulate
Fig. 2. The essence of CDM.
Cognitive diagnosis models are essential for
cognitive diagnosis, aiming to infer the unob-
servable ability levels from the observable re-
sponses to test items. Essentially, most existing
CDMs are/contain simulations of examinees’
cognitive processes. Specifically, as illustrated
in Fig. 2, when answering the test items, ex-
aminees go through a cognitive process that
handles the items with their knowledge status
and then provide their responses to the items.
The responses depend on multiple factors, in-
cluding the characteristics of both items (e.g.,
difficulty [111], relevant knowledge concept, guessing [28]) and examinees (e.g., ability, gaming
behavior [158]). Therefore, the central problem of cognitive diagnosis is to model the relation
between the examinees’ ability levels and their observable behaviors such as responses to test items
[43]. This simulation can be formulated as:
𝑃𝑟(𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑒) = 𝑓(𝜃,𝛽, Ω),
where𝜃,𝛽 are the parameters indicating the examinees’ abilities and items’ features, respectively.
Ω represents the possible parameters required by the CDM itself (empty for some models).
Originating from psychometrics, the models for measuring human abilities have been developed
for decades. The proposal of item response theory (IRT) can be traced back to the 1950s by Fredrick
Lord [94]. IRT is a general framework for specifying mathematical functions that describe the
interactions of persons and test items, where unidimensional parameters were adopted to describe
the abilities of the persons. However, as suggested by researchers such as Glaser [52] and Mislevy
[104], IRT and its previous test theories (e.g., classical test theory [37]) only measure the macro
ability of individuals. Psychology was suggested to be combined with psychometrics in order to
model the micro knowledge structure and cognitive processing of persons during the assessments
so that the diagnostic results can be more instructional. The termcognitive diagnosis model (CDM)
is originally adopted to denote such models1. The proposal and usage of Q-matrix was a significant
milestone of CDM [124]. Subsequently, representative models such as AHM [75], DINA [28] and
NIDA [68] were proposed based on different assumptions to simulate the knowledge structures or
cognitive processes, and each examinee is classified into a mastery pattern representing his/her
mastery of each specific skill. These models fall into the cognition level paradigm [104].
In recent years, some researchers have been rethinking the issue of cognitive diagnosis from the
perspective of machine learning and have proposed novel solutions [86]. Collaborative filtering
and matrix factorization methods were adopted to model learners’ ability and to predict learners’
test performance [129, 130, 134]. Gierl et al. [51] proposed a neural network-based ability classifier
trained with the data generated by a pre-trained attribute hierarchical model. More recently, Wang
et al. recognized the limitations of expert-designed interaction functions and proposed a new
data-driven cognitive diagnosis framework called NeuralCD [145]. Deep learning-based models
incorporated with the theories/hypotheses from psychometrics have the advantage of better fitting
ability of the sophisticated cognitive process, as well as promising interpretability. Since then,
such deep learning-based paradigm gradually becomes a new tendency and has been attracting
increasing attention [97, 146, 150]. In addition to the usage of various deep learning technologies, this
1The usage of the terminology in academia has not achieved a complete consensus. Strictly speaking, IRT-like models are
mostly regarded as the predecessor of CDM. For convenience and without significant violation of the original definition, in
this paper, we use cognitive diagnosis model (CDM) to denote all the models for cognitive diagnosis.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 4 =====

4 Fei Wang, et al.
Paper
Structure
Cognitive Diagnosis Models Overview of CDMs §2
Psychometrics-based
Models §3
Ability Level Paradigm §3.1
Cognition Level Paradigm §3.2
Machine Learning-based
Models §4
Non-deep Learning-
based Models §4.1
Deep Learning-based Models §4.2
Parameter Estimation §5
Model Evaluation §6
Application §7
Datasets and Tools §8
Future Research Directions §9
Conclusion §10
Fig. 3. Scope and structure of the survey.
paradigm takes the naturally saved data of learners’ daily behaviors into consideration, breaking the
limitation of intentional tests. Furthermore, more types of data were further explored as supplements
for cognitive diagnosis, including the knowledge structures [46, 79], the text of test items [21, 146],
and the context features of learners [175].
In terms of application areas, although cognitive diagnosis used to mainly focus on diagnosing
students’ knowledge mastery and patients’ psychological disorders in the past, nowadays cognitive
diagnosis has been more widely applied in various areas. For example, traditional IRT was also
adopted to model the ability of workers in data crowdsourcing to improve the accuracy of truth
inference [6, 153]. Gu et al. [56] considered the effect of cooperation and competition among game
players’ abilities to predict the outcomes of matches. An et al. [3] diagnosed the proficiency of trial
lawyers in different legal fields by proposing a lawyer proficiency assessment network.
1.1 Goal and Contributions
The goal of this survey is to summarize the past studies of cognitive diagnosis models, allowing
newcomers to have a comprehensive understanding of cognitive diagnosis. At the same time, we
will emphasize recent developments in cognitive diagnosis, and provide our understanding about
new trends in the research.
The contributions are summarized as follows:
• We review the development stages of cognitive diagnosis models in the past, including the
recent new trends in research.
• We provide a more complete and comprehensive review of the recent deep learning-based
cognitive diagnosis models.
• We demonstrate the usefulness of cognitive diagnosis, including its downstream applications
and its usage in various areas.
• We discuss the limitations of current cognitive diagnosis models and potential future research
directions.
1.2 Paper Structure
In the rest of the paper, we review the research on cognitive diagnosis from the aspects of model
structure, parameter estimation, evaluation, applications, datasets and future directions, as depicted
in Fig 3. Specifically, we firstly give an overview of CDMs in Section 2, and then introduce the
details of existing models by classifying them into two main classes, i.e., psychometrics-based
models (Section 3) and machine learning-based models (Section 4). In Section 5, we summarized
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 5 =====

A Survey of Models for Cognitive Diagnosis: New Developments and Future Directions 5
the most commonly used algorithms for estimating the parameters in different types of CDMs.
In Section 6, we summarize the evaluation of CDMs from multiple aspects. Applications based
on cognitive diagnosis are summarized in Section 7. Finally, we discuss the limitations of current
research and potential research directions for future studies in Section 9. The paper is concluded in
Section 10.
2 THE OVERVIEW OF COGNITIVE DIAGNOSIS MODELS
2.1 Preliminary
Suppose there are examineesS ={𝑆1,...,𝑆 𝐼}, test itemsQ ={𝑄1,...,𝑄 𝐽} and𝐾 item attributes
(i.e., skills or knowledge concepts). The responses are denoted as𝑅 ={𝑅𝑖,𝑖 = 1,...,𝐼 }, where𝑅𝑖
denotes the responses of𝑆𝑖.𝑅𝑖 ={(𝑆𝑖,𝑄 𝑗,𝑟𝑖𝑗),𝑆𝑖∈S,𝑄 𝑗∈Q} denotes𝑆𝑖’s responses and𝑟𝑖𝑗 is the
response result of𝑆𝑖 on𝑄𝑗. Usually there is an expert-labeled Q-matrix𝑄 ={𝑞𝑗𝑘}𝐽×𝐾, where𝑞𝑗𝑘 =1
(or 0) indicating that item𝑄𝑗 requires (or does not require) the mastery of attribute𝑘 to answer
it correctly. Sometimes there are extra multifaceted information available, such as item content
and examinees’ background, which we denote as𝑋 . The problem of cognitive diagnosis can be
generally defined as follows:
Problem Definition. With the input𝑅,𝑄 and possible𝑋 , the goal of cognitive diagnosis is to out-
put examinees’ ability levels𝜃𝑖(𝑖 = 1,...,𝐼 ), where𝜃𝑖 is either unidimensional or multidimensional
indicating the overall ability levels or the mastery levels of each attribute.
The practicability of cognitive diagnosis is based on several basic assumptions.
Assumption 1. Constant ability. The cognitive status of concern, i.e., ability level, remains
unchanged during the process of answering the test items.
It is reasonable to assume that a person’s ability level does not change in a short time (e.g., during
a standard test), during which the person’s ability level can be measured based on the responses to
test items. Here lies the big difference between cognitive diagnosis and knowledge tracing, of which
the latter also attracted wide attention in recent years. Knowledge tracing focuses on modeling
the changing patterns of online learners’ knowledge states (either explainable or unexplainable),
which highly relies on sequential modeling methods such as hidden Markov chains and Recurrent
Neural Networks. The cognitive process is usually neglected in the knowledge tracing models, and
predicting learners’ future performance is the most adopted task. By contrast, cognitive diagnosis
aims to measure learners’ ability level within a certain period of time. It mines the response data
of learners, models the cognitive process of answering items, and provides the values of learners’
ability levels within a certain metric space.
Assumption 2. Constant item characteristics. The characteristics of a test item remain constant
over all of the testing situations where it is used [111].
Some statistics of the item such as the correct rate can be influenced by the examinees. However,
the characteristics of a test item, such as the difficulty, discrimination, and relevant knowledge
concepts, reflect the essential features of the item and should not change. This type of stability
contributes to the fairness of test items for all examinees, and suggests that test items can be
represented by fixed parameter values that reflect these characteristics.
Assumption 3. Monotonicity. The probability of a correct response to the test item increases,
or at least does not decrease, as the locations of examinees increase on any of the coordinate
dimensions [111].
Most cognitive diagnosis models adopt the monotonicity assumption in their modeling of cog-
nitive processes, especially IRT-based and MIRT-based models. This assumption suggests that a
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 6 =====

6 Fei Wang, et al.
Ability level
Non-deep learning based
Deep learning based
IRT 
(Lord 
& Rasch)
Time
1PL-IRT
(Rasch)
2PL-IRT,
3PL-IRT
(Birnbaum)
MIRT
RSM 
(Tatsuoka)
DINA 
(Junker)
GDM 
(Davier)
G-DINA
(De La Torre)
NeuralCD 
(Wang)
MRMF (Thai-Nghe)SVM
 (Zheng) FuzzyCDF (Wu)
NN 
(Gierl)
ID-CDF 
(Li)
Psychometrics 
based
Machine learning 
based
1961 1968 1970s
1950s - 1960s
1983 2001 2005 2011
2010 20152008 2020 2024
0 0.57 0.61
    
          
  
  
  
  
    
    
Cognition level
Fig. 4. Representative models in the development of cognitive diagnosis model structures.
better performance should result from a higher ability level, which is in accordance with common
intuition or experience.
The above assumptions are the most adopted ones in cognitive diagnosis models. There are some
model-specific assumptions in the research, leading to different model structures. For example,
DINA [28] and NIDA [68] models make detailed and different assumptions about how examinees’
mastery of knowledge concepts decides their responses, and the Rule Space Method [124] assumes
a hierarchical structure of knowledge concepts. We will provide some introduction in §3 and §4.
In the following content of the paper, we will use 𝜃 to represent examinees’ ability; use 𝛽 to
represent the features of test items, such as difficulty and discrimination. The features of test items
could be used differently, and we will provide explanations when introducing specific CDMs. In
addition, we will use Ω to represent all the parameters contained in a CDM itself besides the two
types of parameters mentioned above. Ω only exists in the ML-based CDMs (§4).
2.2 A Brief Review of Cognitive Diagnosis Model Development
Without cognitive diagnosis, the most widely adopted method to evaluate a learner’s ability is
through their scores obtained in tests. Classical Test Theory (CTT) [37] was proposed to eliminate
the errors existing in the scores. However, the score is the observed reflection of ability with
the influence of factors such as question attributes and other psychological characteristics. To
extract the actual ability hidden in the observations, cognitive diagnosis models sprouted from
Psychometrics and have undergone decades of study. The development of cognitive diagnosis can
be summarized from the aspects of both model structures and data characteristics.
2.2.1 The development of model structures. Basically, the development of cognitive diagnosis
models can be divided into two stages, i.e., psychometrics-based models and machine learning-
based models. Fig. 4 illustrates some of the representative works and the times they were proposed.
Each stage of the development can be further divided into two sub-stages as follows:
Psychometrics-based models. At the first stage of cognitive diagnosis development, ability mea-
surement were based on psychometrics. Early research works were summarized as theability level
paradigm [104], as they used unidimensional or multidimensional latent vectors to represent exam-
inees’ overall ability levels. Representative methods include IRT and multidimensional IRT (MIRT).
According to [111], its popularity is generally attributed to the work of Fredrick Lord and Georg
Rasch starting in the 1950s and 1960s. Both IRT and MIRT have undergone lots of development and
there is a large class of implementations. §3.1 will provide a more detailed review of representative
models. With the demand of measuring fine-grained ability, i.e., mastery of knowledge concepts
or skills, the cognition level paradigm was proposed to improve diagnostic performance. The
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 7 =====

A Survey of Models for Cognitive Diagnosis: New Developments and Future Directions 7
• Item 1: correct (1)
• Item 2: incorrect (0)
• Item 3: correct (1)
• Item 4: 2 points / 3 total
• …
Score: 90
Scale-based tests
Numerical data
Solve the equation                     , x= ____.
Integer Decimal
Fraction
Real Number
…
Integer Decimal
Fraction
Real Number
…
Background information:
Item content:
Family education
Learning habits … 
Teacher attitude
Fig. 5. The changes of data types exploited by cognitive diagnosis.
proposal of Q-matrix and its usage is a hallmark of these methods [124]. Representative works in-
clude RSM [124], DINA [68], GDM [139], G-DINA [29], etc. Section 3.2 will provide more summary
about such models.
Machine learning-based models. Later in 2000s, there came increasingly more studies using
machine learning (ML) models for cognitive diagnosis, such as clustering algorithms [ 24, 57],
support vector machine [84, 174], matrix factorization [129, 130, 134] and fuzzy set [157]. §4.1 gives
a review of relevant research using machine learning models for cognitive diagnosis before deep
learning-based methods become popular. Although Gierl et al. [ 51] made early attempts to use
artificial neural networks as classifiers for cognitive diagnosis, the popularity of deep learning
(DL)-based CDMs is mostly attributed to the work of Wang et al. [145] which preliminarily validated
the superiority of using data-driven deep learning methods in cognitive diagnosis and inspired
numerous research works [45, 46, 97, 120]. More recently, Li et al. [78] put emphasis on inductive
diagnosis and proposed an encoder-decoder-like CDM. We will provide a comprehensive summary
and comparison in §4.
2.2.2 The changes of exploited data. As shown in the left part of Fig. 5, in the early research
works, the response data for diagnosing examinees’ ability is collected from scale-based tests,
where scales (e.g., questionnaires, test papers) are constructed and tests are intentionally organized.
Only numerical data, i.e., correct, incorrect, and scores, is utilized in early psychometrics-based
methods, such as IRT, MIRT, and DINA. After that, some psychometrics-based models leverage
simple hierarchical structures among a small number of knowledge concepts by either using them
to help with the defining of Q-matrix or explicitly modeling the hierarchical structures, such as
AHM. Overall, the data types that can be utilized in pure psychometrics-based models are limited
due to the simplicity of model structures.
With the usage of machine learning, researchers have been making attempts to leverage more
types of data that contain relevant information for cognitive diagnosis. Especially after NeuralCD
[145] validated the superiority of using deep learning methods in cognitive diagnosis, including
better fitting ability and extensibility without losing explainability, following studies started to
explore diverse types of data, including test item contents, examinees’ background information
and sophisticated graph-structured data (the right part of Fig. 5). Moreover, the response data in
consideration is not limited to scale-based tests. The popularity of online learning systems provides
more opportunities of accessing learners’ daily behavioral data as well as diverse data types.
Therefore, cognitive diagnosis can be conducted even without organizing tests in an interruptive
way if we regard learners’ ability as constant during a short time period. Some researchers addressed
the data sparsity problem within learners’ response logs [146, 164], and considered supplementary
data such as response time and hints [130, 158, 167, 168]. More detailed behaviors such as keystrokes
and eye tracking can be available, however, they still need further exploration.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 8 =====

8 Fei Wang, et al.
Psychometrics-based
models
Ability level paradigm
IRT
Dichotomous IRT 1PL/2PL/3PL-IRT
Polytomous IRT
Other IRT modelsMIRT
Cognition
level paradigm
Rule Space Method
DINA, DINO, NIDA, NIDO, etc.
GDM
Others
RUM
LCDM
MLTM-D
...
Fig. 6. A taxonomy of psychometrics-based cognitive diagnosis models.
3 PSYCHOMETRICS-BASED COGNITIVE DIAGNOSIS MODELS
Traditional cognitive diagnosis models (CDMs) utilize statistical methods based on psychometrics
to model examinees’ cognitive status. These models can be categorized into two paradigms, i.e., the
ability level paradigm and the cognition level paradigm (Fig. 6).
3.1 Ability Level Paradigm
In the ability level paradigm, researchers focus on the estimation of the overall ability of examinees
reflected on tests. Traditional models following the ability level paradigm usually model examinees’
overall ability levels by low-dimensional𝜃, which can be jointly estimated with low-dimensional
item parameters such as discrimination and difficulty. As mentioned before, we include Item
Response Theory (IRT) [16, 67] and Multidimensional IRT (MIRT) [111] into the review even if
they were proposed before the term cognitive diagnosis appeared.
3.1.1 Item Response Theory (IRT). IRT [16, 67] is one of the most classical latent trait methods
for measuring human cognitive status. The core assumption of IRT is that the relation between
examinees’ responses and their ability levels can be modeled by a continuous mathematical function.
i.e.,𝑃𝑟(𝑟𝑖𝑗 = 1) = 𝑓(𝜃𝑖,𝛽 𝑗), where𝜃𝑖 is a scalar parameter indicating the ability level of examinee
𝑖, and 𝛽𝑗 denotes the latent traits of test item 𝑗. Many IRT-based models are simply called IRT,
among which the most representative models include one-parameter logistic IRT (1PL-IRT), two-
parameter logistic IRT (2PL-IRT) and three-parameter logistic IRT (3PL-IRT). 1PL-IRT only uses
a scalar parameter𝑏𝑗 to capture the difficulty of item 𝑗. 2PL-IRT adds an extra scalar parameter
𝑎𝑗 to indicate the discrimination of item𝑗. While 3PL-IRT adds a parameter𝑐𝑗 for item 𝑗, which
is mostly interpreted as the probability of correctly guessing the answer. These models take
dichotomous response scores into consideration, i.e., 𝑟𝑖𝑗 = 0, 1 indicating incorrect and correct
responses respectively. Their formulas are as follows, and Fig. 7 depicts their model structures as
generative probabilistic graphical models.
1PL-IRT:𝑃𝑟(𝑟𝑖𝑗 = 1|𝜃𝑖,𝑏𝑗) =𝜎(𝜃𝑖−𝑏𝑗) = 1
1+𝑒−(𝜃𝑖−𝑏 𝑗), (1)
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 9 =====

A Survey of Models for Cognitive Diagnosis: New Developments and Future Directions 9
𝜃 𝑏
𝜎(𝜃 − 𝑏)
Response
𝜃 𝑏
𝜎[𝑎 𝜃 − 𝑏 ]
Response
𝑎 𝜃 𝑏
𝑐 + (1 − 𝑐)𝜎[𝑎 𝜃 − 𝑏 ]
Response
𝑎 𝑐
(a) 1PL-IRT (b) 2PL-IRT (c) 3PL-IRT
𝜃 𝑏
𝜎(𝑎T𝜃 + 𝑏)
Response
𝑎
(d) 2PL-MIRT
Fig. 7. The comparison of representative IRT and MIRT models.
1PL-2RT:𝑃𝑟(𝑟𝑖𝑗 = 1|𝜃𝑖,𝑎𝑗,𝑏𝑗) = 1
1+𝑒−𝑎 𝑗(𝜃𝑖−𝑏 𝑗), (2)
1PL-3RT:𝑃𝑟(𝑟𝑖𝑗 = 1|𝜃𝑖,𝑎𝑗,𝑏𝑗,𝑐𝑗) =𝑐𝑗+( 1−𝑐𝑗) 1
1+𝑒−𝑎 𝑗(𝜃𝑖−𝑏 𝑗). (3)
Despite IRT models represent the ability levels in the simplest scalar form, their excellent
mathematical properties (e.g., the convex property of the interaction function) allow them to
be applied to a variety of downstream tasks such as computerized adaptive testing. Although
IRT models for dichotomous items attract more attention, there have been extended models for
polytomous items. For polytomous items, scores can be multiple-graded. For example, for an item
whose full score is 10, the obtained scores might be 0, 5, 8 and 10. Researchers have developed
various polytomous IRT models such as Partial Credit Rasch Model [101], Rating Scale Model [4]
and Graded Response Model [118].
3.1.2 Multidimensional Item Response Theory (MIRT). MIRT [111] extends the ability modeled
in IRT to multidimensional cases. Similar to exploratory factor analysis (EFA), MIRT allows for
the exploration of multidimensionality and complex relationships between observed variables and
latent traits, particularly in the context of assessments or tests. The simplest form of MIRT is a
direct extension from 2PL-IRT and is given as𝑃𝑟(𝑟𝑖𝑗 = 1|𝜃𝑖,𝑎𝑗,𝑏𝑗) = 1/(1+𝑒−(𝑎⊤
𝑗𝜃𝑖+𝑏 𝑗)), where𝑎𝑗
denotes item discrimination on multiple dimensions, and𝑏𝑗 is related to item difficulty. In practice,
a small dimension is usually enough for MIRT, and each dimension of𝜃𝑖 represents a specific ability
required to successfully answer the item. However, when using low-dimensional parameters, the
ability is hard to explain explicitly. just like factor analysis. Besides relating to EFA and extending the
dimension of IRT, MIRT also connects the cognition level paradigm. In the cognition level paradigm,
researchers focus more on the fine-grained cognitive states of examinees, such as proficiency levels
on pre-defined knowledge concepts. Along this line, da Silva et al. [ 26] introduce the Q-matrix
into the interaction function of MIRT to obtain examinees’ knowledge-concept-wise latent traits.
To ensure the identifiability of MIRT, item discrimination vector𝑎𝑗 of different items are usually
rotated to the same value to acquire identifiable estimations of examinees’ abilities [7].
3.2 Cognition Level Paradigm
In the cognitive level paradigm, researchers focus on the estimation of the fine-grained cognitive
states of students. For instance, in K-12 course learning, test designers require diagnosing students’
proficiency level on knowledge concepts (e.g., the concept linear function in mathematics) from
their test performances. Therefore, CDMs in the cognitive level paradigm are utilized to estimate
student knowledge proficiencies in this scenario. Since such a diagnosis process can be viewed
as classifying students to an “ideal” proficiency pattern that is most suitable for his/her test
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 10 =====

10 Fei Wang, et al.
(1 − 𝑠𝑘)𝜃𝑖𝑘𝑔𝑘1−𝜃𝑖𝑘
𝑠𝑗 𝑔𝑗
AND
𝜃𝑖
{0, 1}
η𝑖𝑗
(1 − 𝑠𝑗)η𝑖𝑗𝑔𝑗1−η𝑖𝑗
Response
𝑠𝑗 𝑔𝑗
OR
𝜃𝑖
η𝑖𝑗
(1 − 𝑠𝑗)η𝑖𝑗𝑔𝑗1−η𝑖𝑗
Response
𝜃𝑖
(1 − 𝑠𝑘)𝜃𝑖𝑘𝑔𝑘1−𝜃𝑖𝑘
AND
𝑠𝑘 𝑔𝑘
Response
(1 − 𝑠𝑘)𝜃𝑖𝑘𝑔𝑘1−𝜃𝑖𝑘
𝜃𝑖
(1 − 𝑠𝑘)𝜃𝑖𝑘𝑔𝑘1−𝜃𝑖𝑘
OR
𝑠𝑘 𝑔𝑘
Response
(a) DINA (b) DINO (c) NIDA (d) NIDO
Required Knowledge concept Unrequired Knowledge concept
Fig. 8. The comparison among DINA, DINO, NIDA and NIDO.
performance, traditional cognitive level paradigm-based CDMs are also named as Diagnostic
Classification Model (DCM).
3.2.1 Rule Space Method (RSM) And Its Variations. The RSM proposed by Tatsuoka in the 1980s [124],
is a statistical modeling approach used for cognitive diagnosis. Compared with IRT, RSM focuses
on representing the cognitive processes that individuals use to respond to test items, which is
more fine-grained. It seeks to identify the specific cognitive rules or strategies that individuals
employ when answering test items. Four steps are included in RSM, i.e., item decomposition, rule
specification, rule space construction, and rule space matching.
The RSM is a fundamental yet significant method in traditional CD, and is the basis of many
DCMs [74, 75]. One shortcoming of the traditional RSM is that it views knowledge concepts
as independent entities and ignores their hierarchical relationship in the cognitive process (e.g.,
knowledge dependency). Therefore, Leighton et al. [75] proposed the Attribute Hierarchy Method
(AHM) to address this issue. Compared to the original RSM, the AHM assumes that attributes (i.e.,
knowledge concepts or skills that are required for students to solve a test item) are organized in a
hierarchical structure, which can be represented by an adjacent matrix of attributes. Then the AHM
limits the rule space defined in the RSM, such that the mastery of any child attribute should be no
less than the mastery of its parent attribute. Then the AHM matches each student into the most
similar ideal response patterns, with the corresponding rule as the diagnostic result of the student.
3.2.2 DINA And Relevant CDMs. Deterministic Input, Noisy “And” Gate (DINA) model [28] is a
representative and recognized CDM. DINA and its relevant CDMs diagnose students’ knowledge
concept-wise abilities from binary response data and expert-labeled question-knowledge relation-
ship. The core assumption of DINA is that the proficiency of different knowledge concepts is
non-compensatory. That is, the model assumes that mastery of all required attributes is necessary
for a correct response, but also allows for the possibility of guessing. In DINA, each student 𝑖’s
ability status is modeled as a binary knowledge mastery pattern vector 𝜃𝑖 =(𝜃𝑖1,...,𝜃 𝑖𝐾). Here
𝐾 denotes the number of knowledge concepts, and the binary value𝜃𝑖𝑘∈{ 1, 0} denotes whether
or not student𝑖 has mastered the knowledge concept𝑘. Items are modelled by “slip” and “guess”
parameters and a pre-given binary Q-matrix𝑄 =(𝑞1,...,𝑞 𝐽)⊤ =(𝑞𝑗𝑘)𝐽×𝐾. The interaction func-
tion of DINA is defined as𝑃𝑟(𝑟𝑖𝑗 = 1|𝜃𝑖,𝑞𝑗,𝑠𝑗,𝑔𝑗) =(1−𝑠𝑗)𝜂𝑖 𝑗𝑔1−𝜂𝑖 𝑗
𝑗 , where𝜂𝑖𝑗 = Î𝐾
𝑘=1𝜃𝑞 𝑗𝑘
𝑖𝑘 is the
indicator of whether the student has mastered all required knowledge concepts of the item. The𝑠𝑗
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 11 =====

A Survey of Models for Cognitive Diagnosis: New Developments and Future Directions 11
and𝑔𝑗 denote respectively the “slip” and “guess” parameters of item 𝑗. Then the goal of the DINA
model is to estimate the psychological factors including student cognitive state𝜃𝑖, item parameters
𝑠𝑗 and𝑔𝑗 given observed binary response scores.
There are some representative CDMs similar to DINA but different in the assumption. Fig. 8
demonstrates a comparison among DINA and the following examples. The Deterministic Input,
Noisy “Or” Gate (DINO) model [127] assumes the proficiency of different knowledge concepts to
be compensatory. That is to say, the examinee is supposed to correctly answer the item if at least
one required knowledge concept is mastered and there is no slipping. Compared to DINA, DINO
has a more relaxed assumption and is suitable for certain circumstances such as items with multiple
solving strategies. One risk of DINO is an over-estimation of students’ ability levels. The Noisy
Inputs, Deterministic "And" Gate (NIDA) model [100] and Noisy Inputs, Deterministic "Or" Gate
(NIDO) model assume that examinees may slip on their mastered knowledge concepts or guess
on unmastered knowledge concepts. These noisy mastery patterns then compose the response in
compensatory and non-compensatory ways respectively.
3.2.3 General Diagnostic Model (GDM). The General Diagnostic Model (GDM) [139] is a general
framework that subsumes many classical and well-known CDMs like DINA, IRT and MIRT [14, 140].
As a general framework, GDM is suitable for various real-world scenarios, including but not limited
to dichotomous/polytomous response scores, binary/continuous/polytomous ordinal knowledge
mastery levels, etc. We introduce the general form of GDM in this section.
Formally, let𝜃 be a K-dimensional skill profile consisting of polytomous or dichotomous skill
attributes𝜃𝑘(𝑘 = 1,...,𝐾 ). Then the probability of a polytomous response score𝑥∈{ 0,...,𝑚 𝑗} to
item 𝑗 under the GDM with an individual with skill profiles𝜃 is defined as
𝑃𝑟(𝑟𝑗 =𝑥|𝜃 =(𝜃1,...,𝜃 𝐾)) = exp

𝛽𝑗𝑥+ Í𝐾
𝑘=1𝛾𝑗𝑥𝑘ℎ𝑗(𝑞𝑗𝑘,𝜃𝑘)

1+ Í𝑚 𝑗
𝑦=1 exp

𝛽𝑗𝑦+ Í𝐾
𝑘=1𝛾𝑗𝑦𝑘ℎ𝑗(𝑞𝑗𝑘,𝜃𝑘)
, (4)
where𝛽𝑗𝑥 and𝛾𝑗𝑥𝑘(𝑗 = 1, 2,...,𝐽 ) are estimable item parameters. Each element𝑞𝑗𝑘,𝑗 = 1, 2,...𝐽,𝑘 =
1, 2,...,𝐾 of the Q-matrix is a constant, as in other DCMs like DINA. The helper functionℎ(·,·)
maps𝑞𝑗𝑘 and𝜃𝑘 to a real number, which considers the fact that the knowledge profile𝜃 might be
polytomous. By elaborately designing the form of the parameter𝛾 and the helper function, GDM
can be flexibly applied to either binary or polytomous response data. As a constraint latent class
model, the parameter estimation of GDM is usually done with expectation-maximization (EM)
algorithm [33, 65].
Due to its generality and flexibility, there are also many other versions for GDM to adjust some
special scenarios, like mixture distribution extensions of GDM which consider the ability prior of
student groups, and hierarchical extensions of GDM which consider the multilevel distribution of
student abilities. Indeed, many traditional CDMs, including CDMs in the ability level paradigm like
IRT and MIRT [14], and CDMs in the cognitive level paradigm like LCDM and DINA [140], have
been proven to be special cases of GDM.
3.2.4 Other Traditional CDMs. Besides representative CDMs introduced above, there are also some
other traditional CDMs that focus on different research challenges in the context of educational
measurement. For instance, the Reparameterized Unified Model (RUM) [ 58], as a refinement of
DINA, aims to construct a cognitive diagnosis assessment system that includes DCM models,
estimation procedure, classification algorithm and model-and-data checking function. De La Torre
[29] proposed the G-DINA, as a general cognitive diagnosis framework similar to GDM, which
subsumes many existing CDMs like DINA. Henson et al. [60] proposed the Log-Linear Cognitive
Diagnosis Model (LCDM) based on GDM, which integrates the log-linear model into the calculation
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 12 =====

12 Fei Wang, et al.
ML-based
CDMs
Non-DL CDMs
DL-based CDMs
DL-based architectures
Mastery pattern classifier
Cognitive interaction
simulator DNN
NAS
GNN
...
Encoder-decoder
DL for multifaceted information
CD + KT
Other topics
Fig. 9. A taxonomy of machine-learning based cognitive diagnosis models.
ofℎ(·,·). Therefore, LCDM is a special case of GDM and focuses more on the interaction between
students and items [141]. Embretson and Yang [41] proposed the Multicomponent Latent Trait Model
for Diagnosis (MLTM-D), which aims to diagnose hierarchically structured skills or knowledge
concepts. In a word, traditional CDMs are usually the combinations of psychometric assumptions
and statistical methods.
4 MACHINE LEARNING-BASED COGNITIVE DIAGNOSIS MODELS
In recent years, with the development of AI-based education, cognitive diagnosis has raised the
attention of researchers from computer science, especially artificial intelligence. CDMs based on
machine learning (ML), especially deep learning (DL), are consequently proposed [86]. With the
advantages of better fitting ability and more flexible structures to make use of different types of
educational data (e.g., response, item content, knowledge concept structure), machine learning-
based CDMs have achieved much success, leading to a new trend of research. We roughly classify
these works according to their proposed time and technology/target in Fig. 9.
4.1 Non-deep-learning Models
In the earlier works, there were several attempts using clustering algorithms to classify examinees
into different clusters, where each of the clusters represents a type of knowledge mastery pattern.
For example, Chiu [24] adopted K-means clustering combined with hierarchical agglomerative
cluster analysis, Guo et al. [57] adopted spectral clustering algorithms. Support vector machine
(SVM) was also used in several studies for cognitive diagnosis [84, 174], where examinees’ response
logs are input as features and possible knowledge mastery statuses are predicted by SVM. Supervised
training data including the known knowledge status is required for SVM-based methods, which
limits the practicality of these models. Collaborative filtering methods such as matrix factorization
were also adopted to solve the cognitive diagnosis problem in education [129, 130, 134]. However, as
these models focus on predicting students’ performance instead of diagnosing students’ knowledge
proficiencies, the estimated student parameters are not explicitly explainable. Wu and Liu et al.
[89, 157] proposed FuzzyCDF which integrates the fuzzy set to handle both objective and subjective
test items. Wu et al. [156] introduced a variational Bayesian inference algorithm for IRT, which
provides a faster and more accurate human ability estimation compared to traditional IRT, especially
on large-scale datasets.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 13 =====

A Survey of Models for Cognitive Diagnosis: New Developments and Future Directions 13
4.2 Deep learning-Based Models
Integrating deep learning methods has been a new trend in cognitive diagnosis. According to the
model architectures and their emergence time, deep learning-based CDMs can be generally classified
into mastery pattern classifier, cognitive interaction simulator, and encoder-decoder-based
architectures. In §4.2.1 we will review these types of CDMs in detail, following an exploration of
multifaceted information (§4.2.2) and other topics in cognitive diagnosis research (§4.2.4).
4.2.1 DL-based Architectures.
(1) Mastery Pattern Classifier .
Artificial neural networks were initially adopted in cognitive diagnosis in a reverse manner
compared to traditional models, as depicted by Fig. 10 (a). Typically, as introduced in the Introduction,
CDMs simulate the cognitive mechanism of the human’s item-answering process. Therefore, the
goal of cognitive diagnosis, i.e., humans’ ability levels, is actually at the input side of traditional
models because it’s the cause of human responses. The ability evaluation is actually done through
model training instead of model inference. In contrast, Gierl et al. [51] proposed a reversed model
structure based on neural networks, which takes the examinee’s response pattern (i.e., a binary
vector that indicates his/her responses) as input, and directly outputs the examinee’s attribute
pattern (i.e., a vector that indicates his/her mastery on each knowledge concept). As a result, the
CDM becomes a classification model, which can be abstracted as:
𝜃 =𝑔𝑁𝑁(𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑒, Ω). (5)
As empirical response data with the examinee’s true ability levels is unavailable, the model is
trained with simulated data, which is generated using traditional CDMs such as AHM. Similarly,
Cui et al. [25] adopted the self-organizing map to construct the classification model for ability
evaluation. The main advantage of these methods is that the ability evaluation can be done with
model inference after model training, even if the examinee is out of the training data. However,
as pointed out by Briggs et al [15], the performance of these models is limited by the CDMs that
generate the training data. When the items and/or data generation model is flawed, the trained
CDM will naturally incorporate those flaws. Moreover, the ability estimation can be unstable after
multiple times of model training.
(2) Cognitive Interaction Simulator .
Most deep learning-based CDMs still follow the traditional practice, i.e., model the cognitive
interaction during the item answering process like a simulator, as depicted by Fig. 10 (b). The
differences mainly lie in how the interactions are modeled. As pointed out by Wang et al. [145],
traditional psychometric-based CDMs rely on domain experts to design interaction functions for
predicting examinees’ responses. Although this approach offers high interpretability, it is costly, and
the fixed function form often leads to weak fitting and generalization capabilities. Wang et al. [145]
made an initial break through along this line. They abstracted the cognitive factors involved in
the process of answering questions and attributed them to student factors, exercise factors, and
interaction functions. A neural network-based framework called NeuralCD was proposed, which
can be generally formulated as follows:
𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑒 = 𝑓𝑁𝑁(𝜃,𝛽, Ω). (6)
Here,𝜃 represents the examinee’s ability level and is modeled with a multi-dimensional continuous
vector, where the value of each entry indicates the proficiency of a specific knowledge concept. The
item parameters𝛽 here can be the knowledge difficulty, item discrimination, etc. The main difference
between NeuralCD and psychometric-based CDMs is that NeuralCD introduced the data-driven
strategy to learn the interaction function with neural networks from actual response data. The
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 14 =====

14 Fei Wang, et al.
Response
𝜃 𝛽
Response
Response
(a) Mastery Pattern Classifier (b) Cognitive Interaction Simulator (c) Encoder-decoder
Response
𝑔𝑁𝑁
𝑓𝑁𝑁
𝜃 𝛽
𝑓𝑁𝑁𝑑𝑒𝑐
𝑓𝑁𝑁𝑒𝑛𝑐
𝜃 𝛽
Fig. 10. The comparison of deep learning-based cognitive diagnosis models.
monotonicity assumption was adopted together with the knowledge relevancy vector to ensure the
explainability of diagnostic results, i.e., the estimated𝜃. Wang et al. also illustrated the generality and
extensibility of NeuralCD. The simplicity, robust generalizability, and psychological interpretability
based on the monotonicity assumption make NeuralCD highly attractive. Consequently, NeuralCD
has inspired the emergence of quite a few DL-based CDMs.
Deep neural network (DNN). The DNN is the most straightforward deep learning method
to construct the interaction functions. Wang et al. [ 145] have provided a basic implementation
based on NeuralCD called NeuralCDM. Formally, NeuralCDM reconstructs the response of each
learner𝑖 to the test item 𝑗 with the formula 𝑃𝑟(𝑟𝑖𝑗 = 1) = 𝑓𝐷𝑁𝑁(𝑞𝑗◦( 𝜃𝑖−𝑏𝑗)∗ 𝑎𝑗), where
the interaction function 𝑓𝐷𝑁𝑁 consists of multiple fully connected layers. The ability status of
learner𝑖 is represented with a𝐾-dimensional vector,𝜃𝑖∈ R𝐾, where𝐾 denotes the total number
of knowledge concepts corresponding to all test items. Each dimension𝜃𝑖𝑘 , ranging from 0 to 1,
represents the proficiency level of learner𝑖 on concept𝑘. In NeuralCDM, the test item is considered
as a difficulty parameter𝑏𝑗∈ R𝐾 and a discrimination parameter𝑎𝑗∈ R1, similar to MIRT.𝑞𝑗∈ R𝐾
is the 𝑗th row of the Q-matrix indicating the knowledge concepts required by item𝑗. The symbol
◦ denotes the element-wise product. Notably, NeuralCDM strictly adheres to the monotonicity
assumption by restricting the layer weights to be nonnegative.
Some deep learning-based CDMs are direct extensions of NeuralCDM. Wang et al. [146] proposed
KaNCD to model the latent knowledge associations with the aim of mitigating the low knowledge
coverage problem as well as improving the diagnostic performance. Ma et al. [97] proposed KSCD
that introduces additional parameters for knowledge concepts to better capture the relationship
among students, items, and knowledge concepts. Meanwhile, Li et al. [76] added the guessing and
slipping parameters of test items and replaced the first-layer of the NeuralCDM interaction module
with IRT to enhance the interpretability while maintaining data-driven generalization, effectiveness,
and efficiency. Cheng et al. [22] added a knowledge point importance vector to the input layer of
NeuralCDM. Similarly, Li et al. [80] added parameters to depict the impacts of different knowledge
concepts, as well as the guessing and slipping factors, thereby proposing the CDMFKC model.
Wang et al. [150] improved NeuralCDM by aggregating the knowledge concepts by converting
them into a graph structure and only considering the leaf node of the knowledge concept tree.
Some extensions made use of extra information, such as the text content [146]. We will introduce
them in Section 4.2.2.
Neural architecture search (NAS). In addition to widely used neural networks, some studies
have opted for the more complex neural architecture search (NAS)-based approach to construct the
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 15 =====

A Survey of Models for Cognitive Diagnosis: New Developments and Future Directions 15
interaction function𝑓𝑁𝑁 , offering an intriguing alternative. Despite this shift, these endeavors still
operate within the NeuralCD framework and can thus be represented using Eq. (6). The primary
distinction lies in implementing the interaction function𝑓𝑁𝑁 using NAS instead of conventional
neural networks. For example, Yang et al. [ 162, 163] leverage evolutionary NAS to implement
the interaction function. They define the cognitive diagnosis task as a search space within NAS
and design various algorithms to search for the optimal solution, aiming to automatically fit the
interaction between learners and items.
Graph neural network (GNN). Some researchers have realized that the correlation between
learners, items, and even knowledge concepts can form a graph structure, and therefore incorporated
GNN into their cognitive diagnostic models. In these works, GNN was mainly used to either improve
the embeddings of learners, items, and knowledge concepts [ 85, 103] or model the propagation
of the influence among the mastery of different knowledge concepts [ 46, 122]. Meanwhile, the
interaction among the learners, items, and knowledge concepts was still modeled with DNN. We
will review more details in Section 4.2.2.
Others. There are a few studies trying to combine some traditional psychometrics-based CDMs
with deep learning. For example, Gao et al. [45] combines the IRT, DINA and neural networks, and
predicts learners’ scores on both objective and subjective items. Wang et al. [151] took IRT, DINA,
HO-DINA, and MIRT into consideration and fused them in two ways with neural networks.
(3) Encoder-Decoder-based Architecture.
A few recent studies have raised attention to encoder-decoder-based CDMs. If we regard the
first type of architecture (mastery pattern classifier) as the encoder and the second type (cognitive
interaction simulator) as the decoder, then the new architecture can be seen as the combination of
the above (Fig. 10 (c)). Encoder-decoder-based CDMs take responses (and maybe more types of data
in the future) as input, encode them into examinees’ explainable ability vectors and item parameters,
and then decode them to reconstruct the input responses. It can be formalized as follows:
𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑒 = 𝑓𝑁𝑁 𝑑𝑒𝑐(𝜃,𝛽, Ω𝑑𝑒𝑐|𝜃,𝛽 ← 𝑓𝑁𝑁 𝑒𝑛𝑐(𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑒, Ω𝑒𝑛𝑐)), (7)
Such architecture overcomes the shortcomings of the mastery pattern classifier architecture as
it can be trained directly using real-world datasets. Moreover, after model training, the diagnosis
process can be conducted inductively which means that examinees who do not appear in the
training data can be directly diagnosed based on their response data using the encoder. Along this
line, Li et al. [78] proposed a response-proficiency-response paradigm called ID-CDF, where the
encoder module is implemented with a simple yet effective DNN. Similarly, Liu et al. [ 91] also
proposed an inductive encoder-decode-like CDM called ICDM, where the authors constructed
a student-centered graph based on the response data and Q-matrix, and encoded the nodes (i.e.,
students, questions, and knowledge concepts) into embedding vectors that can be transformed
to explainable student’s ability levels. In addition, in [78], the authors raised concerns about the
inherent non-identifiability and explainability overfitting issues of the traditional decoder-like
architecture. These issues can negatively impact the quantification of learners’ cognitive states
and the quality of web learning services. The superiority of ID-CDF in solving the above problems
has been verified in the paper. Chen et al. proposed DCD [19], which maps cognitive parameters
and test item traits into distributional forms, utilizing a variational autoencoder as the interaction
function to enhance the model’s generalization capability. The ICD model proposed by Qi et al. [108]
basically follows the encoder-decoder architecture. A data enhancement approach was proposed so
that each learner’s responses were divided differently multiple times.
4.2.2 Integration of Multifaceted Information. Despite significant progress in cognitive diagnosis
interaction function technology, the bottleneck of cognitive diagnosis arises from the initialization
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 16 =====

16 Fei Wang, et al.
of diagnosis factors (learner features and test item features) solely based on their IDs. Thus,
researchers have begun exploring ways to enhance the expressive ability of diagnosis factors with
multifaceted information, including side-information and domain priors, aiming to further improve
the interpretability and performance of diagnosis models.
Let X denote the multifaceted information. We hence model the CDM that introduces multifaceted
information as follows:
𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑒 = 𝑓𝑁𝑁(𝜃,𝛽, Ω|𝜃← 𝑓𝑁𝑁 𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑟(X, Ω𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑟),𝛽 ← 𝑓𝑁𝑁 𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑚(X, Ω𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑚)), (8)
where𝑓𝑁𝑁 𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑟 and𝑓𝑁𝑁 𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑚 are feature extraction functions to extract useful clues from multifaceted
information to generate solid diagnosis factors, i.e., learner cognitive traits and test item traits.𝑓𝑁𝑁
is the interaction function for the diagnosis prediction. The multifaceted information X commonly
utilized in cognitive diagnosis can be categorized into three types as follows.
Learner-side information. From the perspective of learners, extra information typically in-
cludes learner features or profiles, such as age, gender, behaviors, and preferences, as well as
contextual information like school details, family income, and parental occupation, all of which
are relevant to the learner. The learner-side information can provide richer insights than mere
IDs. Zhou et al. [ 175] leveraged learner features (e.g., gender, age, region) as the initial profile
and contextual information related to the learners (e.g., school details and parents’ occupation)
to uncover implicit relations between learners’ contextual information and their performance in
practice. This study not only enhances diagnostic performance but also sets the groundwork for
subsequent research on fairness in education [173].
Item-side information. In addition to relevant knowledge concepts/skills, commonly employed
item-side information encompasses the item contents, such as texts and images (Fig. 11 (a)), as well
as exceptional factors like guessing and slipping, which offer detailed semantic cues to represent
item traits. Song et al. [120], Cheng et al. [21], Gao et al. [47], and Wang et al. [146] extracted item
difficulty and discrimination from text or image content, enhancing the extensibility of CDMs to
cold-start items. Gao et al. [45] established semantic relationships between item text and knowledge
concepts, enhancing the interpretability of cognitive diagnosis.
Relational graph-based information. Many studies introduce relational graphs based on
the educational priors, such as knowledge concept (KC) graphs (as depicted in Fig. 11 (b)) and
item-concept association graphs, to enhance the representations of both learners and items. Gao et
al. [46] and Su et al. [122] modeled the heterogeneous graph structures of learner-item-knowledge
to fully explored higher-order interaction relationships between the nodes and the dependency
relationships between knowledge concepts within a concept map, thus enhancing the representation
of learner cognitive states and item features. Li et al [ 79] proposed the HierCDF framework to
model the influence of hierarchical knowledge structures on cognitive diagnosis. Song et al. [120]
focused on the effective fusion of knowledge concept maps with knowledge concept dependency
relations and item features. Jiao et al. [66] revealed the relationships between knowledge concepts
and items, as well as concept dependency relations within the knowledge concept map, enhancing
the representation of item and learner features.
4.2.3 Combination of cognitive diagnosis and knowledge tracing. As mentioned in §2.1, cognitive
diagnosis assumes constant ability, which is a big difference compared to knowledge tracing. This
assumption is reasonable in circumstances when examinees’ ability is stable in a relatively short
time period. However, there are indeed situations that need to model the changes in examinees’
ability levels. For example, at an online learning platform, a learner may receive exercises related
to a certain knowledge concept multiple times to practice. This type of learning process involves
changes in learners’ abilities, which the learners and maybe other platform users care about.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 17 =====

A Survey of Models for Cognitive Diagnosis: New Developments and Future Directions 17
Response
𝜃
Context
 Side information
(a) (b) (c)
𝑓𝑁𝑁
𝛽
Fig. 11. (a) Examples of item-side information; (b) An example of knowledge concept graph with prerequisite
and collaboration relations; (c) DL-based CDMs integrating multifacet information.
Due to the lack of interpretability of traditional knowledge tracing models, some researchers
combined cognitive diagnosis models with knowledge tracing. For example, Zhang et al. [ 171]
developed Gated-GNN to trace the student-knowledge response records and to extract students’
latent traits, and used IRT to predict the probability of students answering exercises correctly. Gan
et al. [44] and Li et al. [77] combined the key-value memory network with IRT. Wang et al. [144]
proposed a Dynamic Cognitive Diagnosis (DynamicCD) approach. This work provided a relatively
extensive discussion about what types of educational priors from cognitive diagnosis models can be
integrated with knowledge tracing, how they are integrated, and what influences they bring. The
proposed approach provides a more nuanced understanding of learners’ evolving knowledge states,
as well as a more accurate prediction of learners’ performance. Ma et al. [98] proposed a continuous
time based Neural Cognitive Modeling (CT-NCM) that combines the neural Hawkes process with
CDMs, thereby integrating the dynamism and continuity of knowledge forgetting into the learning
process modeling. Liu et al. [90] proposed a two-stage method to automatically discover symbolic
laws governing skill acquisition from learners’ sequential response data. In the first stage of their
method, a transformer-like module is used to encode learners’ sequential response data and then
combined with 3PL-IRT to predict the scores. In the second stage, symbolic regression is used to
extract core patterns from the trained deep-learning regressor into algebraic equations, resulting in
symbolic rules. It is worth pointing out that, the combination of cognitive diagnosis and knowledge
tracing might be seen as an extension of the encoder-decoder-based architecture of CDMs.
The difference mainly lies in that the encoder is from the knowledge tracing academia which better
models the sequential data and tracks the evolution of knowledge status.
4.2.4 Other Issues. Considering the practical demands of real-world scenarios, recent studies
have been focusing on developing cognitive diagnosis methods tailored for specific application
contexts. These contexts often come with their own complexities and data constraints, necessitating
specialized approaches to effectively address the unique challenges they present.
Cognitive diagnosis under limited data scenarios. The practice data of learners in real
learning scenarios often face limitations. For instance, the self-driven nature of online learning
leads many learners to selectively engage with items they excel in or practice irregularly, resulting
in a ’sparse issue’ that introduces biases into their diagnosis results. To address this challenge,
Yao et al. [164] analyzed the features of both interacted and non-interacted items and designed an
item-aware partial order constraint to guide cognitive diagnosis modeling.
Moreover, in real learning platforms, new courses are frequently introduced where learner data
is unavailable, presenting a cold-start problem. Traditional CDMs heavily rely on abundant learner
practice data, which becomes scarce in such scenarios. In response, Gao et al. [ 48] proposed a
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 18 =====

18 Fei Wang, et al.
unified knowledge concept graph modeling approach to bridge cold-start scenarios with mature
scenarios possessing rich data, transferring modeling experience from existing contexts to cold-
start situations. Additionally, Gao et al. [47] developed a training-fine-tuning approach leveraging
pre-training to extract universal cognitive representations from existing scenarios. By fine-tuning
a superior cognitive diagnosis model with a small amount of learner practice data in cold-start
scenarios, this method effectively overcomes data scarcity challenges.
Fairness in cognitive diagnosis. Fairness has become a prominent and pressing issue in
education, with recent years witnessing a surge in research focused on fair cognitive diagnosis
modeling. This is especially significant as learners’ diagnostic results produced by CDMs can be
impacted by various sensitive attributes, such as region or socio-economic background during the
model training. Recognizing this, Zhang et al. [173] delved into the fairness in cognitive diagnosis
and uncovered instances of unfairness in prior CDMs. An adversarial-based cognitive diagnosis
framework was proposed to eliminate sensitive information from user vectors, thereby ensuring
fairness in the diagnostic process. Furthermore, Zhang et al. [169] argued that sensitive attributes of
students can also provide valuable information, and only shortcuts directly linked to the sensitive
information should be eliminated. To accomplish this objective, they utilized causal reasoning and
developed a path-specific causal reasoning framework for fairness-aware cognitive diagnosis.
Group-level cognitive diagnosis. While most CDMs have primarily focused on individual-
oriented modeling, real learning scenarios frequently entail group teaching, such as classroom
settings. This necessitates the development of group-level cognitive diagnosis methods to enhance
teaching efficiency. In response to this need, methods based on psychometrics-based CDMs have
been proposed, which either extend IRT to combine with response sampling methods [12, 113] or
average the diagnosed individual abilities [2, 93]. Recent studies have been exploring this issue
using deep learning methods. Huang et al. [64] proposed an efficient group-level diagnosis method
based on educational priors. By considering the collective knowledge and performance of a group,
this approach offers insights that can inform instructional strategies and interventions tailored to
group dynamics. Further advancing group-level diagnosis, Liu et al. [92] integrated homogeneous
relations among learners to enhance diagnosis performance. By leveraging similarities and shared
characteristics among learners within a group, this method offers a more nuanced understanding of
group-level cognitive profiles. These advancements hold promise for optimizing teaching practices
and facilitating collaborative learning experiences in educational settings.
Data privacy in cognitive diagnosis. Data privacy is of great concern nowadays. Learners’
behavioral data on learning platforms could be private data that is not allowed by either learners
or platform administrators to share. In response to such data protection policies, Wu et al. [155]
and Liu et al. [88] proposed federated learning-based user model approaches and applied them to
cognitive diagnosis. These approaches achieved comparable diagnostic performances with local
training approaches, with much less risk of data leakage.
Cognitive diagnosis in adversarial scenarios. In some applications of cognitive diagnosis,
the data is not limited to examinees’ responses to test items, but also the outcome of confrontation
between individuals, or even between teams. For example, Gu et al. [ 56] proposed a NeuralAC
model to measure the abilities of MOBA (multiplayer online battle arena) game players, where the
cooperation and competition factors should be considered. An et al. [ 3] proposed a proficiency
assessment network for trial lawyers, which the role of a lawyer in court cases, including cooperation
with team members and debate with adversarial lawyers, is modeled.
Efficiency in cognitive diagnosis. As Assumption 1 stated, examinees’ ability levels are
assumed to be constant in CDMs. When used in online learning platforms, learners’ parameters
should be updated to keep track of the changes in learner ability. However, frequent re-estimation
of parameters can be uneconomical. Therefore, Tong et al. [132] theoretically discussed when a
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 19 =====

A Survey of Models for Cognitive Diagnosis: New Developments and Future Directions 19
Table 1. A summary of descriptive characteristics of main machine learning-based CDMs. MPC, CIS, ED and
KC are the abbreviations of Mastery Pattern Classifier, Cognitive Interaction Simulator, Encoder-decoder-based
Architecture and Knowledge Concept respectively. The knowledge status provided by several CDMs depends
on base CDMs because they are frameworks that can be applied to different existing CDMs.
CDM Architecture ML basis Knowledge statusExtra Information Other topicsSVM[84, 174] MPC SVM Binary vector \ \MF[129, 130, 134]CIS MF Hidden state \ \FuzzyCDF[89] CIS Fuzzy Set Real-valued vector \ \
NN[51] MPC DNN Real-valued vector \ \SOM[25] MPC Self-organized mapBinary vector \ \NeuralCDM[145]CIS DNN Real-valued vector \ \KaNCD[146] CIS DNN Real-valued vector \ \KSCD[97] CIS DNN Real-valued vector \ \NeuralNCD[76]CIS DNN Real-valued vector \ \IK-NeuralCD[22]CIS DNN Real-valued vector \ \CDMFKC[80] CIS DNN Real-valued vector \ \CDGK[150] CIS DNN Real-valued vector \ \NAS-GCD[163] CIS NAS Real-valued vector \ \EMO-NAS-CD[162]CIS NAS Real-valued vector \ \RCD[46] CIS GNN, DNN Real-valued vectorKC structure \Graph-EKLN[103]CIS GNN, DNN Real-valued vectorKC structure \GCDM[122] CIS GNN, DNN Real-valued vector \ \deepCDF[45] CIS Other Real-valued vector Text Subjective and objective exercisesLDM-ID/HMI[151]CIS Other Real-valued vector \ \CNCD-Q/CNCD-F[146]CIS DNN Real-valued vector Text \ECD[175] CIS DNN Real-valued vectorLearner context \HierCDF[79] CIS DNN, Bayesian NNDepends on base CDMKC structure \CMNCD[120] CIS DNN Real-valued vectorText, Image, KC structure \QI-NeuralCDM[66]CIS DNN Real-valued vectorKC structure \TechCD[48] CIS GNN, DNN Real-valued vectorKC structure Limited data scenarios, Cold-startZero-1-to-3[47] CIS DNN Real-valued vectorText, Learner relationsLimited data scenarios, Cold-startEIRS[164] CIS DNN Real-valued vectorItem-aware partial orderLimited data scenarios, Data sparsityFairCD[173] CIS DNN Real-valued vectorLearner context FairnessMGCD[64] CIS DNN Real-valued vector \ Group-levelHomoGCD[92] CIS DNN Real-valued vectorLearner relations Group-levelHPFL[155] CIS DNN, Federated learningReal-valued vector \ Data privacyAHPFL[88] CIS DNN, Federated learningReal-valued vector \ Data privacyNeuralAC[56] CIS DNN Hidden state \ Adversarial scenariosLawyerPAN[3] CIS DNN Real-valued vector Text Adversarial scenariosICD[132] CIS DNN Depends on base CDM\ EfficiencyID-CDF[78] ED Enc-Dec, DNNDepends on base CDM\ IdentifiabilityICDM[91] ED Enc-Dec, GNNReal-valued vector \ \ICD[108] ED Enc-Dec, DNNReal-valued vector \ \DASPM[85] ED Enc-Dec, GNNReal-valued vectorKC structure \DCD[19] ED Enc-Dec,𝛽-TCVAEGaussian distributionKC structure Limited Exercise-Knowledge Labels
CDM should be updated and how to incrementally update it, thereby proposing an incremental
cognitive diagnosis (ICD) method.
Finally, we provide a summary of the descriptive characteristics of main machine learning-based
CDMs in Table 1.
5 PARAMETER ESTIMATION
Parameter estimation is responsible for the psychological factor estimation within CDMs,
especially the parameters representing examinees’ ability levels. This section provides several rep-
resentative parameter estimation methods employed in cognitive diagnosis, including Expectation
Maximization (EM), Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), and Gradient Descent (GD). Since most
of the existing cognitive diagnosis models are simulations of examinees’ cognitive processes during
item answering, estimating parameters is approximately equivalent to diagnosing examinees’ ability
status. The main purpose of cognitive diagnosis models is to obtain the estimated parameters rep-
resenting examinees’ abilities instead of predicting the examinees’ future performance. Regardless
of a few exceptions [25, 51, 156], this is a big difference compared to traditional machine learning
whose goal is to train models that can be used to predict the labels of unseen samples.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 20 =====

20 Fei Wang, et al.
5.1 Expectation Maximization
Expectation Maximization (EM) [34] is widely adopted for non-deep-learning CDMs, where Ω =∅,
such as IRT [154], MIRT [170], DINA [28] and G-DINA [29]. Note that in some papers, it is also called
the marginalized maximum likelihood estimation (MMLE). The missing data in the EM algorithm
refers to the examinees’ ability parameters in the CDM. Therefore, a standard EM algorithm for
CDMs is as follows:
Expectation (E-step): In this step, given the observed responses and the current parameter
values, the Q-function is calculated:
𝑄[(𝛽,𝜋)|(𝛽(𝑠),𝜋(𝑠))] =
𝐼∑︁
𝑖=1
log[
∫
𝜃𝑖
𝑃𝑟(𝑅𝑖|𝜃𝑖,𝛽)𝑃𝑟(𝜃𝑖|𝑅,𝛽(𝑠),𝜋(𝑠))d𝜃𝑖], (9)
where𝜋 represents the prior distribution of examinees’ ability parameters and𝛽 represents all the
item parameters;𝛽(𝑠),𝜋(𝑠) represent the current values of𝛽 and𝜋 estimated in the last iteration. The
prior distribution𝜋 can be either fixed or estimated during the iterations. A convenient strategy is to
discretize the prior distribution when𝜃𝑖 is a continuous parameter (e.g., in IRT), which significantly
simplifies the calculation of the integral [154].
Maximization (M-step): In this step, the algorithm updates the values of𝛽 and𝜋 to maximize
the Q-function:
(𝛽(𝑠+1),𝜋(𝑠+1)) = arg max
𝛽,𝜋
𝑄[(𝛽,𝜋)|(𝛽(𝑠),𝜋(𝑠))]. (10)
The EM algorithm iteratively alternates between the E-step and M-step until convergence.
In the standard practice of EM algorithm for CDMs, the parameter estimation is a two-stage
process. The first stage is item calibration, which estimates item parameters while regarding the
examinees’ abilities as latent variables following particular prior distribution (i.e.,𝜋). This stage is
sometimes conducted using the responses provided by a particular group of examinees and is an
especially necessary step for computer adaptive testing (CAT) to construct item banks [138]. At
the second stage, examinees’ ability parameters are estimated taking the previously estimated item
parameters as known and fixed.
5.2 Markov Chain Monte Carlo
MCMC can be thought of as a successor to the standard two-stage practice of EM-based methods,
which treats the item and examinee parameters at the same time. Compared to EM-based methods,
MCMC-based methods are generally easier to implement and remain straightforward as model
complexity increases, at the cost of generally slower execution times [107].
The Gibbs sampling approach of MCMC can be straightforwardly used for CDMs with multiple
parameters. In case when the distribution is difficult to directly draw samples from, one can
integrate the Metropolis-Hastings approach that introduces the acceptance rate into the sampling
[30, 89, 107]. The parameters can be grouped into blocks to update simultaneously so as to increase
the efficiency [49]. MCMC was extended to address problems such as missing data, multiple item
types, rated responses, and response time [106, 119, 167].
5.3 Gradient Descent
Since deep learning-based CDMs have relatively complicated model structures with more parame-
ters, EM-based and MCMC-based methods are not easily extendable and less efficient for these
models. Instead, gradient descent (GD), which has been the mainstream estimation algorithm
especially used in deep learning, is adopted to train these models.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 21 =====

A Survey of Models for Cognitive Diagnosis: New Developments and Future Directions 21
Cross entropy added by some regularization terms is most adopted as the objective function
[46, 79, 97, 145, 160, 175]. Tong et al. and Yao et al. proposed pairwise objective functions to enhance
the monotonicity and leverage non-interactive items [133, 164]. The optimization can be conducted
through mini-batches [61], and optimizers proposed in the deep learning research are compatible
with CDM training, such as Adam [72], Adagrad [39], and RMSProp [131]. Except for these generally
used methods, research about parameter estimation especially for deep learning-based CDMs is still
underexplored. The robustness of the existing GD methods for CDMs, such as stability, uncertainty
and explainability, might need further analysis.
6 MODEL EV ALUATION
Model Evaluation is an important stage of validating the effectiveness of models and helping
with model selection in real-world applications. Basically, a CDM is expected to provide accurate,
explainable and even robust diagnostic results to users. Due to the large differences between
traditional psychometrics-based CDMs and machine learning-based CDMs, the evaluation methods
tend to be different. We make the summary as follows.
6.1 Evaluation for psychometrics-based CDMs
The evaluation methods for psychometrics-based CDMs are relatively abundant. Some frequently
discussed aspects include goodness-of-fit, reliability, validity, and uncertainty. Goodness-of-fit
evaluates whether accurate (and may also be explainable) diagnostic results can be provided by
CDMs, while the rest is about the robustness of the diagnostic results.
Goodness-of-fit. Goodness-of-fit provides a general measure of whether a CDM is capable
of fitting the response data well. If a CDM cannot even fit most of the data, it is not likely that
the CDM can provide accurate diagnostic results. Various metrics for goodness-of-fit have been
proposed, which can be generally divided into relative fit evaluation and absolute fit evaluation. The
relative fit evaluation compares the fitnesses of different CDMs on a certain dataset. The number of
parameters within a CDM may also be taken into consideration to obtain a balance between fitness
and model complexity. Such metrics include AIC, BIC [142], DIC [121], etc. Absolute fit evaluation
aims to assess the extent to which a model adequately fits the observed data. Fit indices such as
RMSE or chi-square statistic [13] provide quantitative measures of the discrepancy between the
model’s predicted values and the observed data. Lower values of these indices indicate a better fit
between the model and the data. When choosing a CDM to use in applications, a common practice
is to use relative fit metrics to select relatively better fitting CDMs, and use absolute fit metrics to
determine the best CDM or identify the misspecification of Q-matrix and CDM [18, 63].
In addition, quite a lot of works used synthesized datasets for model evaluation. As the groundtruths
of synthesized datasets are known, a straightforward way to evaluate the accuracy of diagnostic
results is to compare the differences between estimated parameters (denoting examinees’ ability
levels or item characteristics) and the groundtruths [27, 31]. When the estimated ability levels are
close to the groundtruths, they are intrinsically explainable. However, such a method cannot be
applied to real-world datasets.
Uncertainty/Confidence. It is not realistic to expect that CDMs always provide accurate and
reliable diagnostic results, in other words, there exists uncertainty within the diagnostic results.
For example, a CDM may not be able to make sure of the actual ability of a learner based on the
observed data (even if it outputs an estimated ability parameter “0.7” for that learner), while it infers
that the ability is most likely in the range of (0.6, 0.8). Therefore, understanding the uncertainty
or confidence of diagnostic results is valuable for assessing the reliability of diagnostic outcomes,
as it unveils potential error margins or ranges in model predictions. By gaining insights into this
uncertainty, decision-makers can better comprehend diagnostic results, factor in potential risks
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 22 =====

22 Fei Wang, et al.
and uncertainties, and make more prudent decisions. Various methods have been proposed to
estimate the uncertainty of psychometrics-based CDMs. For instance, Fully Bayesian sampling-
based methods [107] and the multiple imputation method [161] analyze the uncertainty of IRT and
MIRT by examining variations in diagnostic results. Frequentist methods [105, 114] use standard
errors to depict uncertainty. Duck-Mayr et al. [40] introduce a Gaussian process-based approach
for nonparametric IRT models.
6.2 Evaluation for machine learning-based CDMs
The development of machine learning-based CDMs has a much shorter history compared to
Psychometrics-based CDMs, no matter the research about model evaluation. Due to the big dif-
ference in model structures and maybe the background of researchers, the evaluation of machine
learning-based CDMs is different.
Accuracy-related evaluation. To evaluate whether a CDM provides accurate diagnostic results,
most studies about machine learning-based CDMs, especially deep learning-based CDMs, adopted
the metrics that are usually used to evaluate regression or classification ML models. Research
works of machine learning-based CDMs pay more attention to real-world datasets. However, as
the groundtruths of examinees’ ability levels are not available, the evaluation is usually indirect.
Specifically, each examinee’s responses are divided into a training set and a testing set. The
diagnosis, that is, the parameter estimation, is conducted based on examinees’ responses in the
training set. Based on the estimated ability parameters, CDMs are required to predict the examinees’
responses in the testing set. The motivation is that, if the diagnostic results are accurate, then
the prediction of responses based on them should also be accurate. Metrics from both regression
tasks and classification tasks have been adopted, such as the root mean square error (RMSE), mean
absolute error (MAE) [62], accuracy (ACC) and area under the receiver operating characteristic
curve (AUC) [83]. Another possible reason to divide the training-testing set instead of calculating
the goodness-of-fit on the whole dataset is that machine learning-based CDMs, especially deep
learning-based CDMs, are more sophisticated and have much stronger fitting ability. If we focus on
goodness-of-fit, then the diagnostic results could be easily overfitting.
Explainability. Explainable diagnostic results are extremely important for providing feedback
to users as well as downstream applications. The explainability of diagnostic results is not easy to
define, and is still underexplored. Some studies use the metric called “degree of agreement” (DOA)
to measure the explainability of diagnostic results [19, 20, 145]. The assumption behind DOA is
that, if an examinee𝑎 has a higher proficiency on knowledge concept𝑘 than another examinee𝑏,
then𝑎 is supposed to perform better than𝑏 on test items requiring𝑘. Wang et al. [144] proposed
partial DOA (PDOA) to mitigate the defect of DOA when dealing with test items requiring multiple
knowledge concepts. Li et al. [78] used a similar but reverse metric called “degree of consistency”
(DOC). In DOC, the assumption is that, if an examinee𝑎 performs better than another examinee
𝑏 on test items requiring knowledge concept 𝑘, then the diagnosed 𝑎’s proficiency of 𝑘 should
be higher than 𝑏’s proficiency of 𝑘. Without certain metrics, most works chose to analyze the
explainability with diagnosed cases.
Uncertainty/Confidence. Overall, the evaluation of the uncertainty or confidence for machine
learning-based CDMs is still an underexplored topic. Here are a few studies. Bi et al. [9] incorporated
model uncertainty quantification into a meta-learned cognitive diagnosis framework by considering
ability parameters and meta parameters as fully factorized Gaussian distributions, leading to lower
expected calibration error (ECE). Ma et al. [ 172] also used Gaussian distributions to represent
ability parameters and proposed ReliCD, where the deviations were seen as the indicator of
uncertainty/confidence. An ECE loss was added to the objective function to further decrease the
ECE. Both of the above works seem to focus more on improving the diagnostic performance, while
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 23 =====

A Survey of Models for Cognitive Diagnosis: New Developments and Future Directions 23
incorporating the estimated uncertainty as a useful by-product and validated by ECE. Wang et
al. [147] focused on the uncertainty estimation for CDMs, and provided a unified method called
UCD. UCD also adopted the Bayesian-based method and can be used for both non-deep learning
and deep learning-based CDMs. The uncertainty of diagnostic parameters (i.e., examinees’ and
items’ parameters) was characterized through their posterior probability distributions, and the
deviations were factorized into the data aspect and model aspect. The estimated uncertainty was
validated using the PICP, PIAW metrics, and some statistical analysis.
Discussion. There exists quite a few differences between the evaluation of diagnostic results
for Psychometrics-based CDMs and machine learning-based CDMs. Basically, the evaluation of
accuracy for Psychometrics-based CDMs pays more attention to either accurately re-estimating the
simulated parameters in synthesized datasets or better fitting the responses in real-world datasets.
By contrast, the evaluation of accuracy for deep learning-based CDMs adopts a training-testing
set division of real-world datasets to ensure the generality. Performance prediction task is mostly
adopted to indirectly evaluate the accuracy. Moreover, the evaluation of cognitive diagnostic results
should be comprehensive. The research about the evaluation of machine learning-based CDMs is
still in the initial stage.
In addition to the evaluation of CDMs, there also exist measurements of the reliability and
validity of items within a test. The reliability focuses on whether the items receive consistent
responses across different times and conditions through the test-retest method, Cronbach’s alpha
coefficient [126], etc. The validity of items evaluates the extent to which the items can measure
examinees’ cognitive status. Validity can be assessed through various methods such as correlation
analysis [53], and factor analysis [73].
7 APPLICATIONS
Since the inception of cognitive diagnosis, it has garnered widespread attention and has found
applications in diverse fields. This section aims to provide a primary summary of its applications
in intelligent education, covering areas such as computer adaptive testing and educational rec-
ommendation systems. Additionally, we will delve into the extended applications of cognitive
diagnosis-related technologies in other domains.
7.1 Applications in Education
The most straightforward application of cognitive diagnosis in Education is to generate learning
status diagnostic reports based on the diagnostic results, which help learners together with teachers
to better understand the learning status of learners, and further serve as the basis of personal-
ized applications, including the recommendation of learning resources and learning paths, and
computerized adaptive testing.
Cognitive Diagnostic Reports. Proverbially, both teachers (including intelligent tutoring sys-
tems) and learners need diagnostic reports on the cognitive status of learners. As for the teachers,
they can use the diagnostic reports to check: (1) What are the learners’ characteristics such as
diligence, laziness, and inattention? (2) Whether or to what extent the learners have mastered a
learning unit. As for the students, they need the diagnostic reports to check: (1) Whether or to
what extent they have achieved the learning goal to adjust their learning styles and keep their
learning enthusiasm [55]. To construct cognitive diagnostic reports, Roberts et al. [115] proposed a
framework, that presents a graphical representation of the skill-level performance of individual
students, to provide structured cognitive diagnostic reports with the Attribute Hierarchy Method.
Zeniski et al. [166] advanced a pipeline of diagnostic report development that is defined by seven
guiding principles for report design and validation. Maas et al. [ 99] developed a personalized
student dashboard, which provides a visual summary of student performance and outlines how this
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 24 =====

24 Fei Wang, et al.
information can guide study behavior. Furthermore, online educational platforms (e.g., Zhixue 2,
Eedi 3) have already developed various cognitive diagnostic reports, which include radar figures,
learning paths, and other relevant panels or tables, to provide sufficient reports of cognitive status.
Educational Recommendation Systems. Typically, students pursue studies to meet specific
learning objectives, such as mastering a particular knowledge domain or passing examinations
successfully. Aligned with these predefined objectives, students necessitate tailored learning ma-
terials (typically exercises) to attain their desired outcomes. In conventional learning methods,
there are two predominant strategies for resource selection, i.e., by students themselves and by
professional teachers. Yet, the former strategy might lead to students selecting learning resources
that are either overly basic or excessively advanced, consequently impeding optimal learning
efficiency. Conversely, the latter method could potentially create higher barriers to access [36, 96].
To overcome such problems, recent intelligent tutoring systems (e.g., ouc-online 4) have utilized
cognitive diagnosis methods, which estimate the cognitive state of each student, to choose the best
appropriate learning resources based on their recommendation strategies and finally provide auto-
matic educational recommendations for individual students. In addition, Ma et al. [96] introduced
the neutrosophic set method to compute the similarity between the cognitive states of students
and recommends exercises. Chen et al. [23] relied on the knowledge space theory to recommend
tailored exercises based on estimated students’ cognitive states and knowledge structures. Liu et
al. [87] utilized the cognitive diagnosis model to offer rewards to their reinforcement learning-based
learning path recommending strategy.
Computerized Adaptive Testing. Traditionally, teachers hold a pencil-and-paper test to ac-
complish the student assessment by carefully selecting a fixed set of questions for all examinees at
once. While this method effectively evaluates their performance and presents a uniform testing
environment for all, it is challenging to ensure that the test items are properly selected for each
examinee [8]. Consequently, recent efforts [50, 178] have shifted focus toward Computerized Adap-
tive Testing (CAT). CAT aims to provide tests that adapt dynamically to each examinee by tailoring
test items based on the examinee’s performance. It has several advantages, including heightened
accuracy, shorter test length, enhanced security, and increased examinee engagement. CAT has
already been successfully implemented by some standard test organizations [152] like the Graduate
Management Admission Test (GMAT)5 and the Graduate Record Examinations (GRE).
CDMs are the essential component of CAT, as the estimated ability levels (𝜃) constitute the basis
of item selection. For instance, [17] employed Kullback-Leibler information, computed based on
the unidimensional 𝜃 estimated by IRT, to assess item informativeness for each examinee and
select the most informative one as the next to be assigned. Similarly, [ 95] used the estimated 𝜃
to compute the Fisher information measure for candidate items. Recently, some novel methods
based on advanced machine learning have been proposed. For example, Bi et al. [10] integrated
the concept from active learning, utilizing the model-agnostic expected model change derived
from CDMs as the informative measure to select items. Additionally, [50, 148] formulated the CAT
process as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) and utilized a reinforcement learning paradigm to
address it. These approaches leverage CDMs to handle the state within their MDP formulation.
The study by [178] innovatively transforms the CAT task into a coreset selection problem. This
transformation involves aligning the gradients of the CDMs between a scenario with limited items
and one with a complete set of items.
2https://www.zhixue.com/login.html
3https://family.eedi.com/
4http://one.ouchn.cn/
5The Graduate Management Admission Test (GMAT) stands as the most widely utilized test for admission into graduate
business and management programs worldwide.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 25 =====

A Survey of Models for Cognitive Diagnosis: New Developments and Future Directions 25
7.2 Applications in Other Domains
In recent years, some scholars have expanded the application of cognitive diagnosis-related tech-
nologies into other contexts, achieving notable success in the process.
Truth Inference. Deep learning generally relies on large-scale annotated data, often labeled
through crowdsourcing (e.g., Amazon Mechanical Turk). Truth inference [153], in this context,
refers to the technique of identifying the true data labels from potentially conflicting annotations
made by annotators with varying abilities and backgrounds. In [70, 153] the authors utilized IRT-
based probabilistic approaches to iteratively estimate the abilities of annotators and infer the true
labels of images based on the annotations and abilities. Li et al. [81] extended the previous IRT-based
methods with compressive sensing theory and then mitigated human labeling errors.
Corporate Recruitment. Assessing the skill qualifications of job seekers facilitates better match-
ing between seekers and job requirements in online recruitment services [ 109, 176]. The study
in [109] utilizes a word-level semantic representation module to represent job requirements and
seekers’ abilities, and then predict the compatibility with the hierarchical ability-aware atten-
tion strategies. Zhu et al. [176] proposed an end-to-end convolutional neural network (CNN) to
learn the joint representation of Person-Job fitness between requirements and abilities. Recent
works like [11, 110] proposed advanced neural networks, seeking more patterns to better mine job
requirements and seekers’ abilities, then compute the compatibility between them.
Sport. The assessment of specific skills is vital for athlete development [5]. Matsuoka et al. [102]
introduced an IRT-based system comprising item construction, decision tree analysis, and test
characteristic analysis. This system effectively evaluates defensive transitions in soccer games.
Additionally, the research in [165] explored multi-directional training and technical analysis of
basketball players using neural networks. By analyzing basketball players’ abilities, this approach
enables optimization of their training and team strategy. These assessment tools provide a tailored
means for players, coaches, and managers to monitor the progression of individual skills throughout
the training process.
Game. Precisely estimating players’ abilities and properly arranging multiple players of compa-
rable ability into competitive games, namely matchmaking, is an important component of online
games [35]. Its quality directly determines player satisfaction and further affects the life cycle
of game products. The study in [54] proposed a two-stage data-driven matchmaking framework,
which firstly learns the low-dimensional abilities representations of individuals by capturing the
high-order inter-personal interactions and then incorporates the team-up effect and predicts the
match outcomes. The study in [149] modeled the players and their win-loss relationships as an
undirected weighted skill gap graph. By matching players properly after estimating their abilities,
these works provide players with a considerable gain in their game experience.
Psychological and Physical Health Diagnosis. As the technique arose from psychometrics, it
is natural to use CDMs to diagnose patients’ mental health. For instance, Fraley et al. [42] employed
item response theory to diagnose the existence of adult attachment from self-report measures.
Templin et al. [128] utilized the DINO model to assess and diagnose pathological gamblers. Tu et
al. [135] designed questions related to internet addiction and further utilized G-DINA to diagnose
whether a subject has internet addiction. In addition, CDMs are also used in diagnosing physical
health. Liang et al. [82] employed G-DINA, in conjunction with constructed data and a Q-matrix, to
predict six-month Quality of Life (QoL) in breast cancer. The results from CDMs provide valuable
references for doctors to assess examinees’ health conditions and support planning the treatments.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 26 =====

26 Fei Wang, et al.
Table 2. Basic descriptions of the datasets.
Source Dataset #Examinee #Item #Response #KC/Skill Extra info
Standard
tests
FrcSub 536 20 10,720 8 ✗
Math1 4,209 20 84,180 11 ✗
Math2 3,911 20 78,220 16 ✗
ECPE 2,922 28 81,816 3 ✗
PISA2015 519,334 183 12,612,424 - ✓
E-
learning
systems
ASSISTments2009 4,163 17,751 346,860 123 ✓
ASSISTments2012 46,674 179,999 6,123,270 265 ✓
Junyi 247,606 722 25,925,922 41 ✓
Eedi 118,971 27,613 15,867,850 288 ✓
8 DATASETS AND CDM TOOLS
8.1 Datasets
To further help researchers who have an interest in developing CDMs, we summarize some fre-
quently used datasets in the related works. As the datasets used in early research papers, i.e.,
psychometrics-based CDMs, are mostly synthesized or unavailable, here we only summarize pub-
licly available datasets from recent research papers. Moreover, we have open-sourced a Python
library called EduData6 which provides easy access to numerous datasets.
Basically, the datasets used in CDM research can be classified into two types, i.e., from standard
tests and from e-learning platforms. Table 2 presents some basic descriptions including statistics of
the datasets.
Datasets from standard tests. This type of data is collected from standard tests. Therefore, In
each dataset, all examinees have provided their responses to all test items. The data size is mostly
small, with fewer examinees, test items, and knowledge concepts.
• FrcSub. The FrcSub [89, 125] is composed of the scores of middle school students on fraction
subtraction objective problems.
• Math1 & Math2. The Math1 and Math27 datasets are collected from two final mathematical
exams from high school students, including both objective and subjective problems.
• ECPE. The full name of this dataset isExamination for the Certificate of Proficiency in English 8.
It is collected from a standard English test by the English Language Institute of the University
of Michigan and is well-adopted in educational psychology.
• PISA2015. The PISA20159 dataset is released by OECD’s Programme for International Stu-
dent Assessment. PISA is a worldwide testing program that measures 15-year-olds’ abilities to
address real-life challenges. Four core domains of PISA2015 include science, reading, mathe-
matics and collaborative problem-solving. In addition, PISA also collects students’ background
information such as region, home economic and cultural status through questionnaires. The
test is put out every three years, and PISA2015 is the result released in 2015. Not every student
answers every question as many versions of the computer exam exist. The assessed abilities
are not barely the mastery of knowledge concepts and vary in different core domains. For
6https://github.com/bigdata-ustc/EduData/
7http://staff.ustc.edu.cn/~qiliuql/data/math2015.rar
8https://rdrr.io/cran/GDINA/man/ecpe.html
9http://www.oecd.org/pisa/data/2015database/
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 27 =====

A Survey of Models for Cognitive Diagnosis: New Developments and Future Directions 27
example, in the science domain, the assessment tasks focused on Competencies, Knowledge,
and Context. The Knowledge further includes Content Knowledge, Procedural Knowledge and
Epistemic Knowledge. The usage of these types of abilities is better decided by researchers
and we choose not to simply put their count in the table.
Datasets from e-learning systems. This type of data is collected from e-learning systems,
especially online learning platforms. The responses of a learner may be distributed over either a
short or a long period of time, which might be considered as a violation of the assumption mentioned
in the Overview, i.e., constant ability. The requirements for the dataset are sometimes not very
strict, or the researchers have already assumed that students’ abilities are relatively stable within
the datasets. Some researchers have mentioned this problem and made analyses and preprocesses.
For instance, analyzing the stability of learners’ abilities [145], constructing a subset of the original
dataset where the responses are collected in a shorter period of time [79, 147], and only maintain
the first response to an item when a learner has multiple attempts on it.
• ASSISTments2009 & ASSISTments2012.10 Both of these two datasets are collected from AS-
SISTments, an online tutoring system in the United States. The full name of ASSISTments2009
is the ASSISTments 2009-2010 skill builder data set. ASSISTments2009 is collected during the
school year from 2009 to 2010, and students were asked to practice the questions related to
similar knowledge concepts until they answered three or more times in a row. It is worth
noting that there are multiple versions of ASSISTments2009. Early versions have several
problems that may have caused some unreliable experiments in early research papers [159].
The final version has solved the problems. ASSISTments2012 is collected during the school
year from 2012 to 2013. ASSISTments2012 contains more students and responses. However,
the majority of the test items are not labeled to any knowledge concepts, and each test item
is labeled to no more than one related knowledge concept. Researchers can request access
to the item contents by sending emails to the providers (see the website for details). Both
ASSISTments2009 and ASSISTments2012 provide some side information, such as the attempt
counts, start time, end time, and problem type.
• Junyi.11 The Junyi dataset contains student online learning logs on mathematical exercises
which are collected from a Chinese online learning platform called Junyi Academy. The
dataset contains practicing logs from Oct. 2012 to Jan. 2015, exercise-related information on
the platform, and annotations of exercise relationships.
• Eedi. Eedi is the dataset released by the NeurIPS 2020 education challenge 12, containing
students’ answers to mathematics questions from Eedi, an online educational platform. All
items are 4-choice questions with only one correct choice. In addition, Eedi also provides
side information such as gender, date of birth, group ID, and quiz ID.
8.2 CDM Tools
The implementations of CDMs are not standard and are mostly developed independently by
researchers. In earlier research, psychometrics-based CDMs were usually implemented with R
language (a programming language suitable for statistical analysis). Most of their codes were not
properly shared and are difficult to access now. Additionally, thanks to the relatively longer and
more mature research on psychometrics-based CDMs, there are already some related software and
platforms. For example, the Vector Psychometric Group13 has launched several useful software for
10https://sites.google.com/site/assistmentsdata
11http://www.junyiacademy.org/
12https://competitions.codalab.org/competitions/25449
13https://vpgcentral.com/software/
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 28 =====

28 Fei Wang, et al.
cognitive diagnosis, such as Adaptest, flexMIRT, and IRTPRO. Tu et al. [136] launched a web-based
cognitive diagnosis platform called flexCDMs14, which provides easy usage of traditional DCMs
such as DINA, DINA, rRUM, and GDM.
The research for deep learning-based CDMs prefers Python to implement their models. Although
the code availability is better, it is still laborious to search for the CDMs and learn about the codes
with different programming styles. Therefore, we have developed an open-sourced Python library
called EduCDM15, which provides easy use of numerous CDMs. The code structure of EduCDM is
more unified and thus easier to understand, modify and extend. We will keep updating this library.
9 DISCUSSION OF FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
Despite the promising performances achieved by the existing state-of-the-art CDMs, limits as well
as opportunities exist that encourage future research.
Cognitive diagnosis in more application areas. Cognitive diagnosis has obtained many
achievements in traditional application areas, especially in intelligent education and psychological
measurement. However, the demand for individual ability evaluation is not limited to the traditional
areas. For instance, evaluating the proficiency of trial lawyers in different legal fields enables
matching qualified lawyers to strive for the clients’ best rights while ensuring fairness and litigation
[3]. In companies, effective assessment of employees’ abilities helps with enhancing employee
training and development [116, 143]. Moreover, the objects of diagnosis can be AI agents to assess
their anthropomorphic intelligence. Zhuang et al. [177] made an attempt to measure the cognitive
ability of large language models (LLM) through cognitive diagnosis and adaptive testing. How to
measure the cognitive ability of large models such as LLM and how to leverage large models for
better diagnosing human ability are worthy study. It is expected that cognitive diagnosis can be
developed for wider areas and applications.
More question types and multimodal data. Most cognitive diagnosis models handle binary
responses, which belong to questions having only “correct” or “incorrect” answers. However, some
types of questions can have partially correct answers. For instance, cognitive diagnosis using
polytomous responses has caught some attention in traditional studies [ 4, 101], while it is still
underexplored with deep-learning-based modeling. Another example is the questions requiring
more extensive text responses, such as writing and programming, which have a more complex
scoring structure and are also not sufficiently studied. In terms of data types, existing models mainly
consider information such as question text [146], knowledge concept relations [46], participant
background features [175], etc. The behavior of participants is considered by some works in a
coarse manner, such as the number of attempts, hints, and response time [130, 158, 167, 168]. For
questions such as writing and programming, fine-grained answering progress (e.g., type in, delete,
copy and paste) is underexplored. The primary obstacle on this path is likely to be the collection
and disclosure of data.
More than the model structure. While the concentration of this survey is the cognitive diag-
nosis models, especially the recent development of deep learning-based models and their various
applications, we would like to point out some issues besides the model structure designing that are
ignored by recent research. 1) The definitions of knowledge concepts (or skills) and their structures.
In the field of education, such definitions typically come from experts’ professional knowledge
and rigorous discussion. However, the definition of knowledge concepts in other application ar-
eas can be less rigorous and systematic. 2) Calibration of item parameters. In a more standard
cognitive diagnosis process, there is a calibration stage during which responses to the candidate
14http://www.psychometrics-studio.cn/
15https://github.com/bigdata-ustc/EduCDM
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 29 =====

A Survey of Models for Cognitive Diagnosis: New Developments and Future Directions 29
items are provided by a certain group of examinees. The examinees are supposed to have ability
levels following a certain distribution (e.g., normal distribution [1, 71]). After that, item parameters
are estimated based on these responses. Suitable items are then selected into the item bank and
construct the test papers [112]. For the true test takers who are assigned to these items, their ability
parameters are estimated. In the recent deep learning-based methods, calibration of item parameters
is usually omitted or simplified to facilitate the usage, where the parameters of items and test
takers are estimated simultaneously, with less consideration of the influence of test takers’ ability
distribution upon the parameter estimation. 3) Comparability of diagnostic results. For continuous
CDMs, the diagnostic results, i.e., the estimated parameters of test takers, are most meaningful
within the trained model using the corresponding response data. However, the diagnostic results
among different trained CDMs, even having the same model structure trained with different data,
are not directly comparable. As a measurement tool, the comparability of diagnostic results across
different models is of great use in circumstances such as ability comparison among test takers across
time/institutions, and adding new items into a CAT item bank. Related works called “parameter
linking” have been proposed for CDMs with simple structures including IRT and MIRT [69, 111, 137].
However, for state-of-the-art CDMs, which are more complicated, the comparability problem is
still underexplored. 4) Cognitive diagnosis, if cooperated with some interpretative methods, can be
used for discovering examinees’ cognitive patterns from empirical data in a data-driven way. Liu et
al. [90] have pioneered in this direction and proved its feasibility.
Model evaluation. Model evaluation is an important yet easily neglected problem of cognitive di-
agnosis. Different from most machine learning models focusing on accurately predicting something
either by classification or regression, cognitive diagnosis pays more attention on the diagnostic
results. Although the student performance prediction task is adopted to indirectly validate the
accuracy of diagnostic results due to the lack of ground truth of examinees’ abilities, excessive
focus on the task of student performance prediction will gradually turn the cognitive diagnostic
model into a predictive model rather than a diagnostic model. The evaluation of cognitive diag-
nosis models should be multi-faceted. Especially, the research on evaluation metrics for SOTA
deep learning-based CDMs is still in its infancy and relatively lacking. We hope there will be
insightful research on CDM evaluation from different aspects, including but not limited to accuracy,
explainability, uncertainty, identifiability [78], and stability of parameter estimation.
10 CONCLUSION
In this survey, we have reviewed the development of models for cognitive diagnosis. Basically,
the research history is divided into two stages: psychometrics-based CDMs and machine learning-
based CDMs, between which the latter is the key emphasis of this survey. Through reviewing and
comparing existing research outcomes, we have found that the transition from psychometrics-based
CDMs to machine learning-based CDMs has undergone changes in not only model structures but
also data types. Moreover, the research topics become more diverse. The trend in model structure
is the shift from psychometrics methods where the interaction functions are designed by experts to
data-driven deep learning methods. In terms of data types, behavioral data from online learning
is gradually being taken into consideration, and the role of text, images, graphs, and other types
of data in cognitive diagnosis is being explored. Furthermore, researchers are also beginning to
consider issues such as cold start and fairness in cognitive diagnosis. Besides these, we have also
summarized some main changes in the parameter estimation and model evaluation approaches and
provided some examples of where cognitive diagnosis has been applied.
We hope this survey can invoke more attention on cognitive diagnosis, and inspire more inter-
esting and insightful research in this area. We have summarized some commonly used datasets
and useful tools for the application and research of cognitive diagnosis. In addition, we have also
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 30 =====

30 Fei Wang, et al.
discussed several promising future research directions. In summary, we advocate for the further
development of cognitive diagnostic methods in more fields and from more diversified perspectives.
However, we also remind that attention needs to be paid to the fact that cognitive diagnosis models
are measurement tools for human ability, and avoid placing too much emphasis on predicting
learners’ question-answering performance.
We also recognize some limitations of this survey. First, since this survey focuses more on
the recent progress of cognitive diagnosis, i.e., deep learning-based CDMs, the summary of the
traditional psychometrics-based works may not be comprehensive enough. The related work of
traditional methods is rich and relatively mature thanks to decades of research [38, 74, 112]. Readers
can refer to relevant literature to gain a deeper understanding. Second, as new research work on
cognitive diagnosis continues to emerge and is scattered across different publications in the fields
of education and computer science, we may have missed a few noteworthy works. If necessary, we
will continue to track the progress in this direction in future discussions.
REFERENCES
[1] Terry A Ackerman. 1989. Unidimensional IRT calibration of compensatory and noncompensatory multidimensional
items. Applied Psychological Measurement 13, 2 (1989), 113–127.
[2] Rakesh Agrawal, Behzad Golshan, and Evimaria Terzi. 2014. Grouping students in educational settings. InProceedings
of the 20th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining . 1017–1026.
[3] Yanqing An, Qi Liu, Han Wu, Kai Zhang, Linan Yue, Mingyue Cheng, Hongke Zhao, and Enhong Chen. 2021.
LawyerPAN: a proficiency assessment network for trial lawyers. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference
on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining . 5–13.
[4] Erling B. Andersen. 1997. The Rating Scale Model . Springer New York, New York, NY, 67–84. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-1-4757-2691-6_4
[5] Kozue Ando, Shota Mishio, and Takahiko Nishijima. 2018. Validity and reliability of computerized adaptive test of
soccer tactical skill. Football Science 15 (2018), 38–51.
[6] Yoram Bachrach, Thore Graepel, Tom Minka, and John Guiver. 2012. How to grade a test without knowing the
answers—a Bayesian graphical model for adaptive crowdsourcing and aptitude testing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1206.6386
(2012).
[7] A. A. Béguin and C. A. W. Glas. 2001. MCMC estimation and some model-fit analysis of multidimensional IRT models.
Psychometrika 66, 4 (01 Dec 2001), 541–561. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02296195
[8] Betty A Bergstrom. 1992. Ability Measure Equivalence of Computer Adaptive and Pencil and Paper Tests: A Research
Synthesis. (1992).
[9] Haoyang Bi, Enhong Chen, Weidong He, Han Wu, Weihao Zhao, Shijin Wang, and Jinze Wu. 2023. BETA-CD: a
Bayesian meta-learned cognitive diagnosis framework for personalized learning. InProceedings of the AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 37. 5018–5026.
[10] Haoyang Bi, Haiping Ma, Zhenya Huang, Yu Yin, Qi Liu, Enhong Chen, Yu Su, and Shijin Wang. 2020. Quality meets
diversity: A model-agnostic framework for computerized adaptive testing. In 2020 IEEE International Conference on
Data Mining (ICDM). IEEE, 42–51.
[11] Shuqing Bian, Xu Chen, Wayne Xin Zhao, Kun Zhou, Yupeng Hou, Yang Song, Tao Zhang, and Ji-Rong Wen.
2020. Learning to match jobs with resumes from sparse interaction data using multi-view co-teaching network. In
Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management . 65–74.
[12] Menucha Birenbaum, Curtis Tatsuoka, and Tomoko Yamada. 2004. Diagnostic assessment in TIMSS-R: Between-
countries and within-country comparisons of eighth graders’ mathematics performance. Studies in Educational
Evaluation 30, 2 (2004), 151–173.
[13] Sorana D Bolboacă, Lorentz Jäntschi, Adriana F Sestraş, Radu E Sestraş, and Doru C Pamfil. 2011. Pearson-Fisher
chi-square statistic revisited. Information 2, 3 (2011), 528–545.
[14] Laine Bradshaw and Jonathan Templin. 2014. Combining Item Response Theory and Diagnostic Classification Models:
A Psychometric Model for Scaling Ability and Diagnosing Misconceptions. Psychometrika 79, 3 (01 Jul 2014), 403–425.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11336-013-9350-4
[15] Derek C Briggs and Ruhan Circi. 2017. Challenges to the use of artificial neural networks for diagnostic classifications
with student test data. International Journal of Testing 17, 4 (2017), 302–321.
[16] Justyna Brzezinska. 2020. Item response theory models in the measurement theory. Commun. Stat. Simul. Comput. 49,
12 (2020), 3299–3313.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 31 =====

A Survey of Models for Cognitive Diagnosis: New Developments and Future Directions 31
[17] Hua-Hua Chang and Zhiliang Ying. 1996. A global information approach to computerized adaptive testing. Applied
Psychological Measurement 20, 3 (1996), 213–229.
[18] Jinsong Chen, Jimmy de la Torre, and Zao Zhang. 2013. Relative and absolute fit evaluation in cognitive diagnosis
modeling. Journal of Educational Measurement 50, 2 (2013), 123–140.
[19] Xiangzhi Chen, Le Wu, Fei Liu, Lei Chen, Kun Zhang, Richang Hong, and Meng Wang. 2024. Disentangling Cognitive
Diagnosis with Limited Exercise Labels. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2024).
[20] Yuying Chen, Qi Liu, Zhenya Huang, Le Wu, Enhong Chen, Runze Wu, Yu Su, and Guoping Hu. 2017. Tracking
knowledge proficiency of students with educational priors. InProceedings of the 2017 ACM on Conference on Information
and Knowledge Management. 989–998.
[21] Song Cheng, Qi Liu, Enhong Chen, Zai Huang, Zhenya Huang, Yiying Chen, Haiping Ma, and Guoping Hu. 2019. DIRT:
Deep learning enhanced item response theory for cognitive diagnosis. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM international
conference on information and knowledge management . 2397–2400.
[22] Yan Cheng, Meng Li, Haomai Chen, Yingying Cai, Huan Sun, Gang Wu, Zhuang Cai, and Guanghe Zhang. 2021.
Neural cognitive modeling based on the importance of knowledge point for student performance prediction. In 2021
16th International Conference on Computer Science & Education (ICCSE) . IEEE, 495–499.
[23] Yan Cheng, Meng Li, Haomai Chen, Yingying Cai, Huan Sun, Haifeng Zou, and Guanghe Zhang. 2021. Exercise
recommendation method combining neuralcd and neumf models. In 2021 7th Annual International Conference on
Network and Information Systems for Computers (ICNISC) . IEEE, 646–651.
[24] Chia-Yi Chiu, Jeffrey A Douglas, and Xiaodong Li. 2009. Cluster analysis for cognitive diagnosis: Theory and
applications. Psychometrika 74 (2009), 633–665.
[25] Ying Cui, Mark Gierl, and Qi Guo. 2016. Statistical classification for cognitive diagnostic assessment: An artificial
neural network approach. Educational Psychology 36, 6 (2016), 1065–1082.
[26] Marcelo A. da Silva, Ren Liu, Anne C. Huggins-Manley, and Jorge L. Bazán. 2019. Incorporating the Q-Matrix Into
Multidimensional Item Response Theory Models. Educational and Psychological Measurement 79, 4 (2019), 665–687.
[27] RJ De Ayala, Barbara S Plake, and James C Impara. 2001. The impact of omitted responses on the accuracy of ability
estimation in item response theory. Journal of educational measurement 38, 3 (2001), 213–234.
[28] Jimmy De La Torre. 2009. DINA model and parameter estimation: A didactic. Journal of educational and behavioral
statistics 34, 1 (2009), 115–130.
[29] Jimmy De La Torre. 2011. The generalized DINA model framework. Psychometrika 76 (2011), 179–199.
[30] Jimmy De La Torre and Jeffrey A Douglas. 2004. Higher-order latent trait models for cognitive diagnosis.Psychometrika
69, 3 (2004), 333–353.
[31] Jimmy De La Torre, Yuan Hong, and Weiling Deng. 2010. Factors affecting the item parameter estimation and
classification accuracy of the DINA model. Journal of Educational Measurement 47, 2 (2010), 227–249.
[32] Jimmy De La Torre, L Andries van der Ark, and Gina Rossi. 2018. Analysis of clinical data from a cognitive diagnosis
modeling framework. Measurement and Evaluation in Counseling and Development 51, 4 (2018), 281–296.
[33] A. P. Dempster, N. M. Laird, and D. B. Rubin. 1977. Maximum Likelihood from Incomplete Data Via the EM Algorithm.
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological) 39, 1 (1977), 1–22. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2517-
6161.1977.tb01600.x arXiv:https://rss.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.2517-6161.1977.tb01600.x
[34] Arthur P Dempster, Nan M Laird, and Donald B Rubin. 1977. Maximum likelihood from incomplete data via the EM
algorithm. Journal of the royal statistical society: series B (methodological) 39, 1 (1977), 1–22.
[35] Qilin Deng, Hao Li, Kai Wang, Zhipeng Hu, Runze Wu, Linxia Gong, Jianrong Tao, Changjie Fan, and Peng Cui. 2021.
Globally optimized matchmaking in online games. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge
Discovery & Data Mining . 2753–2763.
[36] Michel C Desmarais and Ryan SJ d Baker. 2012. A review of recent advances in learner and skill modeling in intelligent
learning environments. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction 22 (2012), 9–38.
[37] Robert F DeVellis. 2006. Classical test theory. Medical care (2006), S50–S59.
[38] Louis V DiBello, Louis A Roussos, and William Stout. 2006. 31a review of cognitively diagnostic assessment and a
summary of psychometric models. Handbook of statistics 26 (2006), 979–1030.
[39] John Duchi, Elad Hazan, and Yoram Singer. 2011. Adaptive subgradient methods for online learning and stochastic
optimization. Journal of machine learning research 12, 7 (2011).
[40] JBrandon Duck-Mayr, Roman Garnett, and Jacob Montgomery. 2020. Gpirt: A Gaussian process model for item
response theory. In Conference on uncertainty in artificial intelligence . PMLR, 520–529.
[41] Susan E. Embretson and Xiangdong Yang. 2013. A Multicomponent Latent Trait Model for Diagnosis. Psychometrika
78, 1 (01 Jan 2013), 14–36. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11336-012-9296-y
[42] R Chris Fraley, Niels G Waller, and Kelly A Brennan. 2000. An item response theory analysis of self-report measures
of adult attachment. Journal of personality and social psychology 78, 2 (2000), 350.
[43] Norman Frederiksen, Robert J Mislevy, and Isaac I Bejar. 2012. Test theory for a new generation of tests . Routledge.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 32 =====

32 Fei Wang, et al.
[44] Wenbin Gan, Yuan Sun, and Yi Sun. 2022. Knowledge interaction enhanced sequential modeling for interpretable
learner knowledge diagnosis in intelligent tutoring systems. Neurocomputing 488 (2022), 36–53.
[45] Lina Gao, Zhongying Zhao, Chao Li, Jianli Zhao, and Qingtian Zeng. 2022. Deep cognitive diagnosis model for
predicting students’ performance. Future Generation Computer Systems 126 (2022), 252–262.
[46] Weibo Gao, Qi Liu, Zhenya Huang, Yu Yin, Haoyang Bi, Mu-Chun Wang, Jianhui Ma, Shijin Wang, and Yu Su. 2021.
RCD: Relation map driven cognitive diagnosis for intelligent education systems. InProceedings of the 44th international
ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in information retrieval . 501–510.
[47] Weibo Gao, Qi Liu, Hao Wang, Linan Yue, Haoyang Bi, Yin Gu, Fangzhou Yao, Zheng Zhang, Xin Li, and Yuanjing He.
2024. Zero-1-to-3: Domain-Level Zero-Shot Cognitive Diagnosis via One Batch of Early-Bird Students towards Three
Diagnostic Objectives. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , Vol. 38. 8417–8426.
[48] Weibo Gao, Hao Wang, Qi Liu, Fei Wang, Xin Lin, Linan Yue, Zheng Zhang, Rui Lv, and Shijin Wang. 2023. Leveraging
transferable knowledge concept graph embedding for cold-start cognitive diagnosis. In Proceedings of the 46th
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval . 983–992.
[49] Andrew Gelman, John B Carlin, Hal S Stern, and Donald B Rubin. 1995. Bayesian data analysis . Chapman and
Hall/CRC.
[50] Aritra Ghosh and Andrew Lan. 2021. Bobcat: Bilevel optimization-based computerized adaptive testing.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2108.07386 (2021).
[51] Mark J Gierl, Ying Cui, and Steve Hunka. 2008. Using connectionist models to evaluate examinees’ response patterns
to achievement tests. Journal of Modern Applied Statistical Methods 7, 1 (2008), 19.
[52] Robert Glaser. 1981. The future of testing: A research agenda for cognitive psychology and psychometrics. American
Psychologist 36, 9 (1981), 923.
[53] Nithya J Gogtay and Urmila M Thatte. 2017. Principles of correlation analysis. Journal of the Association of Physicians
of India 65, 3 (2017), 78–81.
[54] Linxia Gong, Xiaochuan Feng, Dezhi Ye, Hao Li, Runze Wu, Jianrong Tao, Changjie Fan, and Peng Cui. 2020. Optmatch:
Optimized matchmaking via modeling the high-order interactions on the arena. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining . 2300–2310.
[55] Dean Goodman and Ronald K. Hambleton. 2004. Student Test Score Reports and Interpretive Guides: Review of
Current Practices and Suggestions for Future Research. Applied Measurement in Education 17 (2004), 145 – 220.
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:143082517
[56] Yin Gu, Qi Liu, Kai Zhang, Zhenya Huang, Runze Wu, and Jianrong Tao. 2021. Neuralac: Learning cooperation and
competition effects for match outcome prediction. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,
Vol. 35. 4072–4080.
[57] Lei Guo, Jing Yang, and Naiqing Song. 2020. Spectral clustering algorithm for cognitive diagnostic assessment.
Frontiers in Psychology 11 (2020), 524197.
[58] S. M. Hartz. 2002. A Bayesian framework for the unified model for assessing cognitive abilities: Blending theory with
practicality. Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences and Engineering, 63, 2-B (2002), 864.
[59] Robert Henson and Jeff Douglas. 2005. Test construction for cognitive diagnosis. Applied Psychological Measurement
29, 4 (2005), 262–277.
[60] Robert A. Henson, Jonathan L. Templin, and John T. Willse. 2009. Defining a Family of Cognitive Diagnosis Models
Using Log-Linear Models with Latent Variables. Psychometrika 74, 2 (01 Jun 2009), 191–210. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11336-008-9089-5
[61] Geoffrey Hinton, Nitish Srivastava, and Kevin Swersky. 2012. Neural networks for machine learning lecture 6a
overview of mini-batch gradient descent. Cited on 14, 8 (2012), 2.
[62] Timothy O Hodson. 2022. Root mean square error (RMSE) or mean absolute error (MAE): When to use them or not.
Geoscientific Model Development Discussions 2022 (2022), 1–10.
[63] Jinxiang Hu, M David Miller, Anne Corinne Huggins-Manley, and Yi-Hsin Chen. 2016. Evaluation of model fit in
cognitive diagnosis models. International Journal of Testing 16, 2 (2016), 119–141.
[64] Jie Huang, Qi Liu, Fei Wang, Zhenya Huang, Songtao Fang, Runze Wu, Enhong Chen, Yu Su, and Shijin Wang. 2021.
Group-level cognitive diagnosis: A multi-task learning perspective. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Data
Mining (ICDM). IEEE, 210–219.
[65] Yan Huo and Jimmy de la Torre. 2014. Estimating a Cognitive Diagnostic Model for Multiple Strategies via the EM
Algorithm. Applied Psychological Measurement 38, 6 (2014), 464–485. https://doi.org/10.1177/0146621614533986
arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1177/0146621614533986
[66] JiuNing Jiao, Yi Tian, LiKun Huang, Quan Wang, and Jiao Chen. 2023. Neural Cognitive Diagnosis Based on the
Relationship Between Mining Exercise and Concept. In 2023 2nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
Computer Information Technology (AICIT). IEEE, 1–4.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 33 =====

A Survey of Models for Cognitive Diagnosis: New Developments and Future Directions 33
[67] Jeffrey Johns, Sridhar Mahadevan, and Beverly Park Woolf. 2006. Estimating Student Proficiency Using an Item
Response Theory Model. In Intelligent Tutoring Systems (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 4053) . Springer,
473–480.
[68] Brian W Junker and Klaas Sijtsma. 2001. Cognitive assessment models with few assumptions, and connections with
nonparametric item response theory. Applied Psychological Measurement 25, 3 (2001), 258–272.
[69] Taehoon Kang and Nancy S Petersen. 2012. Linking item parameters to a base scale. Asia Pacific Education Review 13
(2012), 311–321.
[70] FAIZA KHAN KHATTAK and ANSAF SALLEB-AOUISSI. [n. d.]. Accurate Crowd-labeling using Item Response
Theory. ([n. d.]).
[71] Seonghoon Kim. 2006. A comparative study of IRT fixed parameter calibration methods. Journal of educational
measurement 43, 4 (2006), 355–381.
[72] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2014. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980
(2014).
[73] Paul Kline. 2014. An easy guide to factor analysis . Routledge.
[74] Jacqueline Leighton and Mark Gierl. 2007. Cognitive diagnostic assessment for education: Theory and applications .
Cambridge University Press.
[75] Jacqueline P Leighton, Mark J Gierl, and Stephen M Hunka. 2004. The attribute hierarchy method for cognitive
assessment: A variation on Tatsuoka’s rule-space approach. Journal of educational measurement 41, 3 (2004), 205–237.
[76] Guangquan Li, Yuqing Hu, Junkai Shuai, Tonghua Yang, Yonghong Zhang, Shiming Dai, and Naixue Xiong. 2022.
NeuralNCD: A neural network cognitive diagnosis model based on multi-dimensional features. Applied Sciences 12,
19 (2022), 9806.
[77] Guangquan Li, Junkai Shuai, Yuqing Hu, Yonghong Zhang, Yinglong Wang, Tonghua Yang, and Naixue Xiong.
2022. DKT-LCIRT: A Deep Knowledge Tracking Model Integrating Learning Capability and Item Response Theory.
Electronics 11, 20 (2022), 3364.
[78] Jiatong Li, Qi Liu, Fei Wang, Jiayu Liu, Zhenya Huang, Fangzhou Yao, Linbo Zhu, and Yu Su. 2024. Towards the
Identifiability and Explainability for Personalized Learner Modeling: An Inductive Paradigm. In Proceedings of the
ACM on Web Conference 2024. 3420–3431.
[79] Jiatong Li, Fei Wang, Qi Liu, Mengxiao Zhu, Wei Huang, Zhenya Huang, Enhong Chen, Yu Su, and Shijin Wang. 2022.
HierCDF: A Bayesian Network-based Hierarchical Cognitive Diagnosis Framework. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM
SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining . 904–913.
[80] Sheng Li, Quanlong Guan, Liangda Fang, Fang Xiao, Zhenyu He, Yizhou He, and Weiqi Luo. 2022. Cognitive diagnosis
focusing on knowledge concepts. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge
Management. 3272–3281.
[81] Xiaohua Li and Jian Zheng. 2016. Active learning for regression with correlation matching and labeling error
suppression. IEEE Signal Processing Letters 23, 8 (2016), 1081–1085.
[82] Mu Zi Liang, Peng Chen, M Tish Knobf, Alex Molassiotis, Ying Tang, Guang Yun Hu, Zhe Sun, Yuan Liang Yu, and
Zeng Jie Ye. 2023. Measuring resilience by cognitive diagnosis models and its prediction of 6-month quality of life in
Be Resilient to Breast Cancer (BRBC). Frontiers in Psychiatry 14 (2023), 1102258.
[83] Charles X Ling, Jin Huang, and Harry Zhang. 2003. AUC: a better measure than accuracy in comparing learning
algorithms. In Advances in Artificial Intelligence: 16th Conference of the Canadian Society for Computational Studies of
Intelligence, AI 2003, Halifax, Canada, June 11–13, 2003, Proceedings 16 . Springer, 329–341.
[84] Cheng Liu and Ying Cheng. 2018. An application of the support vector machine for attribute-by-attribute classification
in cognitive diagnosis. Applied psychological measurement 42, 1 (2018), 58–72.
[85] Mengfan Liu, Pengyang Shao, and Kun Zhang. 2021. Graph-based exercise-and knowledge-aware learning network for
student performance prediction. In Artificial Intelligence: First CAAI International Conference, CICAI 2021, Hangzhou,
China, June 5–6, 2021, Proceedings, Part I 1 . Springer, 27–38.
[86] Qi Liu. 2021. Towards a New Generation of Cognitive Diagnosis.. In IJCAI. 4961–4964.
[87] Qi Liu, Shiwei Tong, Chuanren Liu, Hongke Zhao, Enhong Chen, Haiping Ma, and Shijin Wang. 2019. Exploiting
cognitive structure for adaptive learning. InProceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery & Data Mining . 627–635.
[88] Qi Liu, Jinze Wu, Zhenya Huang, Hao Wang, Yuting Ning, Ming Chen, Enhong Chen, Jinfeng Yi, and Bowen Zhou.
2023. Federated User Modeling from Hierarchical Information. ACM Transactions on Information Systems 41, 2 (2023),
1–33.
[89] Qi Liu, Runze Wu, Enhong Chen, Guandong Xu, Yu Su, Zhigang Chen, and Guoping Hu. 2018. Fuzzy cognitive
diagnosis for modelling examinee performance. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST) 9, 4
(2018), 1–26.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 34 =====

34 Fei Wang, et al.
[90] Sannyuya Liu, Qing Li, Xiaoxuan Shen, Jianwen Sun, and Zongkai Yang. 2024. Automated discovery of symbolic laws
governing skill acquisition from naturally occurring data. Nature Computational Science (2024), 1–12.
[91] Shuo Liu, Junhao Shen, Hong Qian, and Aimin Zhou. 2024. Inductive Cognitive Diagnosis for Fast Student Learning
in Web-Based Intelligent Education Systems. In Proceedings of the ACM on Web Conference 2024 . 4260–4271.
[92] Shuhuan Liu, Xiaoshan Yu, Haiping Ma, Ziwen Wang, Chuan Qin, and Xingyi Zhang. 2023. Homogeneous Cohort-
Aware Group Cognitive Diagnosis: A Multi-grained Modeling Perspective. InProceedings of the 32nd ACM International
Conference on Information and Knowledge Management . 4094–4098.
[93] Yuping Liu, Qi Liu, Runze Wu, Enhong Chen, Yu Su, Zhigang Chen, and Guoping Hu. 2016. Collaborative learning
team formation: a cognitive modeling perspective. In Database Systems for Advanced Applications: 21st International
Conference, DASFAA 2016, Dallas, TX, USA, April 16-19, 2016, Proceedings, Part II 21 . Springer, 383–400.
[94] Frederic Lord. 1952. A theory of test scores. Psychometric monographs (1952).
[95] Frederic M Lord. 2012. Applications of item response theory to practical testing problems . Routledge.
[96] Hua Ma, Zhuoxuan Huang, Wensheng Tang, and Xuxiang Zhang. 2022. Exercise recommendation based on cognitive
diagnosis and neutrosophic set. In 2022 IEEE 25th International Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work
in Design (CSCWD). IEEE, 1467–1472.
[97] Haiping Ma, Manwei Li, Le Wu, Haifeng Zhang, Yunbo Cao, Xingyi Zhang, and Xuemin Zhao. 2022. Knowledge-
Sensed Cognitive Diagnosis for Intelligent Education Platforms. InProceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference
on Information & Knowledge Management . 1451–1460.
[98] Haiping Ma, Jingyuan Wang, Hengshu Zhu, Xin Xia, Haifeng Zhang, Xingyi Zhang, and Lei Zhang. 2022. Reconciling
Cognitive Modeling with Knowledge Forgetting: A Continuous Time-aware Neural Network Approach.. In IJCAI.
2174–2181.
[99] Lientje Maas, Matthieu JS Brinkhuis, Liesbeth Kester, and Leoniek Wijngaards-de Meij. 2022. Cognitive diagnostic
assessment in university statistics education: Valid and reliable skill measurement for actionable feedback using
learning dashboards. Applied Sciences 12, 10 (2022), 4809.
[100] E. Maris. 1999. Estimating multiple classification latent class models. Psychometrika 64, 2 (01 Jun 1999), 187–212.
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02294535
[101] Geoff N. Masters. 1982. A rasch model for partial credit scoring. Psychometrika 47, 2 (01 Jun 1982), 149–174.
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02296272
[102] Hiroki Matsuoka, Yasuhiro Tahara, Kozue Ando, and Takahiko Nishijima. 2021. Development of criterion-referenced
measurement items of defensive transition in soccer games from tracking data. International Journal of Sport and
Health Science 19 (2021), 87–97.
[103] Haodong Meng, Changzhi Chen, Hongyu Yi, and Xiaofeng He. 2022. Dual autoencoder enhanced subgraph pattern
mining for cognitive diagnosis. In 2022 IEEE 34th International Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence (ICTAI) .
IEEE, 539–546.
[104] Robert J Mislevy. 2012. Foundations of a New Test Theory. Test Theory for A New Generation of Tests (2012), 19.
[105] Jeffrey M Patton, Ying Cheng, Ke-Hai Yuan, and Qi Diao. 2014. Bootstrap standard errors for maximum likelihood
ability estimates when item parameters are unknown. Educational and Psychological Measurement 74, 4 (2014),
697–712.
[106] Richard J Patz and Brian W Junker. 1999. Applications and extensions of MCMC in IRT: Multiple item types, missing
data, and rated responses. Journal of educational and behavioral statistics 24, 4 (1999), 342–366.
[107] Richard J Patz and Brian W Junker. 1999. A straightforward approach to Markov chain Monte Carlo methods for
item response models. Journal of educational and behavioral Statistics 24, 2 (1999), 146–178.
[108] Tianlong Qi, Meirui Ren, Longjiang Guo, Xiaokun Li, Jin Li, and Lichen Zhang. 2023. ICD: A new interpretable
cognitive diagnosis model for intelligent tutor systems. Expert Systems with Applications 215 (2023), 119309.
[109] Chuan Qin, Hengshu Zhu, Tong Xu, Chen Zhu, Liang Jiang, Enhong Chen, and Hui Xiong. 2018. Enhancing person-job
fit for talent recruitment: An ability-aware neural network approach. In The 41st international ACM SIGIR conference
on research & development in information retrieval . 25–34.
[110] Chuan Qin, Hengshu Zhu, Tong Xu, Chen Zhu, Chao Ma, Enhong Chen, and Hui Xiong. 2020. An enhanced neural
network approach to person-job fit in talent recruitment. ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS) 38, 2
(2020), 1–33.
[111] Mark D. Reckase. 2009. Multidimensional Item Response Theory Models . Springer New York, New York, NY, 79–112.
[112] Mark D Reckase. 2010. Designing item pools to optimize the functioning of a computerized adaptive test.Psychological
Test and Assessment Modeling 52, 2 (2010), 127.
[113] Steven P Reise, Rob R Meijer, Andrew T Ainsworth, Leo S Morales, and Ron D Hays. 2006. Application of group-level
item response models in the evaluation of consumer reports about health plan quality.Multivariate behavioral research
41, 1 (2006), 85–102.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 35 =====

A Survey of Models for Cognitive Diagnosis: New Developments and Future Directions 35
[114] Jason D Rights, Sonya K Sterba, Sun-Joo Cho, and Kristopher J Preacher. 2018. Addressing model uncertainty in item
response theory person scores through model averaging. Behaviormetrika 45 (2018), 495–503.
[115] Mary Roduta Roberts and Mark J Gierl. 2010. Developing score reports for cognitive diagnostic assessments.
Educational Measurement: Issues and Practice 29, 3 (2010), 25–38.
[116] Joel Rodriguez and Kelley Walters. 2017. The importance of training and development in employee performance and
evaluation. World Wide Journal of Multidisciplinary Research and Development 3, 10 (2017), 206–212.
[117] John Rust and Susan Golombok. 2014. Modern psychometrics: The science of psychological assessment . Routledge.
[118] Fumiko Samejima. 1969. Estimation of latent ability using a response pattern of graded scores. Psychometrika 34, 1
(01 Mar 1969), 1–97. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03372160
[119] Na Shan and Xiaofei Wang. 2020. Cognitive diagnosis modeling incorporating item-level missing data mechanism.
Frontiers in Psychology 11 (2020), 564707.
[120] Lingyun Song, Mengting He, Xuequn Shang, Chen Yang, Jun Liu, Mengzhen Yu, and Yu Lu. 2023. A deep cross-modal
neural cognitive diagnosis framework for modeling student performance. Expert Systems with Applications 230 (2023),
120675.
[121] David J Spiegelhalter, Nicola G Best, Bradley P Carlin, and Angelika Van Der Linde. 2002. Bayesian measures of
model complexity and fit. Journal of the royal statistical society: Series b (statistical methodology) 64, 4 (2002), 583–639.
[122] Yu Su, Zeyu Cheng, Jinze Wu, Yanmin Dong, Zhenya Huang, Le Wu, Enhong Chen, Shijin Wang, and Fei Xie. 2022.
Graph-based cognitive diagnosis for intelligent tutoring systems. Knowledge-Based Systems 253 (2022), 109547.
[123] Eran Tal. 2015. Measurement in science. (2015).
[124] Kikumi K Tatsuoka. 1983. Rule space: An approach for dealing with misconceptions based on item response theory.
Journal of educational measurement (1983), 345–354.
[125] Kikumi K Tatsuoka. 1984. Analysis of Errors in Fraction Addition and Subtraction Problems. Final Report. (1984).
[126] Mohsen Tavakol and Reg Dennick. 2011. Making sense of Cronbach’s alpha. International journal of medical education
2 (2011), 53.
[127] Jonathan Templin and Robert Henson. 2006. Measurement of psychological disorders using cognitive diagnosis models.
Psychological Methods, 11(3), 287-305. Psychological methods 11 (09 2006), 287–305. https://doi.org/10.1037/1082-
989X.11.3.287
[128] Jonathan L Templin and Robert A Henson. 2006. Measurement of psychological disorders using cognitive diagnosis
models. Psychological methods 11, 3 (2006), 287.
[129] Nguyen Thai-Nghe, Lucas Drumond, Artus Krohn-Grimberghe, and Lars Schmidt-Thieme. 2010. Recommender
system for predicting student performance. Procedia Computer Science 1, 2 (2010), 2811–2819.
[130] Nguyen Thai-Nghe and Lars Schmidt-Thieme. 2015. Multi-relational factorization models for student modeling in
intelligent tutoring systems. In 2015 Seventh international conference on knowledge and systems engineering (KSE) .
IEEE, 61–66.
[131] Tijmen Tieleman and Geoffrey Hinton. 2012. Rmsprop: Divide the gradient by a running average of its recent
magnitude. coursera: Neural networks for machine learning. COURSERA Neural Networks Mach. Learn 17 (2012).
[132] Shiwei Tong, Jiayu Liu, Yuting Hong, Zhenya Huang, Le Wu, Qi Liu, Wei Huang, Enhong Chen, and Dan Zhang.
2022. Incremental Cognitive Diagnosis for Intelligent Education. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining . 1760–1770.
[133] Shiwei Tong, Qi Liu, Runlong Yu, Wei Huang, Zhenya Huang, Zachary A Pardos, and Weijie Jiang. 2021. Item
Response Ranking for Cognitive Diagnosis.. In IJCAI. 1750–1756.
[134] Andreas Toscher and Michael Jahrer. 2010. Collaborative filtering applied to educational data mining. KDD cup
(2010).
[135] Dongbo Tu, Xuliang Gao, Daxun Wang, and Yan Cai. 2017. A new measurement of internet addiction using diagnostic
classification models. Frontiers in psychology 8 (2017), 302329.
[136] Dongbo Tu, Yong Liu, Xuliang Gao, and Yan Cai. 2023. flexCDMs: A Web-based Platform for Cognitive Diagnostic
Data Analysis. Chinese/English Journal of Educational Measurement and Evaluation 4, 1 (2023), 1.
[137] Wim J van der Linden and Michelle D Barrett. 2016. Linking item response model parameters. Psychometrika 81, 3
(2016), 650–673.
[138] Wim J Van der Linden and Cees AW Glas. 2000. Computerized adaptive testing: Theory and practice . Springer.
[139] Matthias von Davier. 2005. A GENERAL DIAGNOSTIC MODEL APPLIED TO LANGUAGE TESTING
DATA. ETS Research Report Series 2005, 2 (2005), i–35. https://doi.org/10.1002/j.2333-8504.2005.tb01993.x
arXiv:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/j.2333-8504.2005.tb01993.x
[140] Matthias von Davier. 2014. The DINA model as a constrained general diagnostic model: Two variants of
a model equivalency. Brit. J. Math. Statist. Psych. 67, 1 (2014), 49–71. https://doi.org/10.1111/bmsp.12003
arXiv:https://bpspsychub.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/bmsp.12003
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 36 =====

36 Fei Wang, et al.
[141] Matthias von Davier. 2014. The Log-Linear Cognitive Diagnostic Model (LCDM) as a Special Case of the General
Diagnostic Model (GDM). ETS Research Report Series 2014, 2 (2014), 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1002/ets2.12043
arXiv:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/ets2.12043
[142] Scott I Vrieze. 2012. Model selection and psychological theory: a discussion of the differences between the Akaike
information criterion (AIC) and the Bayesian information criterion (BIC). Psychological methods 17, 2 (2012), 228.
[143] Chao Wang, Hengshu Zhu, Chen Zhu, Xi Zhang, Enhong Chen, and Hui Xiong. 2020. Personalized employee training
course recommendation with career development awareness. In Proceedings of the Web Conference 2020 . 1648–1659.
[144] Fei Wang, Zhenya Huang, Qi Liu, Enhong Chen, Yu Yin, Jianhui Ma, and Shijin Wang. 2023. Dynamic cognitive
diagnosis: An educational priors-enhanced deep knowledge tracing perspective. IEEE Transactions on Learning
Technologies (2023).
[145] Fei Wang, Qi Liu, Enhong Chen, Zhenya Huang, Yuying Chen, Yu Yin, Zai Huang, and Shijin Wang. 2020. Neural
cognitive diagnosis for intelligent education systems. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence ,
Vol. 34. 6153–6161.
[146] Fei Wang, Qi Liu, Enhong Chen, Zhenya Huang, Yu Yin, Shijin Wang, and Yu Su. 2022. NeuralCD: a general framework
for cognitive diagnosis. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering (2022).
[147] Fei Wang, Qi Liu, Enhong Chen, Chuanren Liu, Zhenya Huang, Jinze Wu, and Shijin Wang. 2024. Unified Uncertainty
Estimation for Cognitive Diagnosis Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.14676 (2024).
[148] Hangyu Wang, Ting Long, Liang Yin, Weinan Zhang, Wei Xia, Qichen Hong, Dingyin Xia, Ruiming Tang, and Yong
Yu. 2023. GMOCAT: A Graph-Enhanced Multi-Objective Method for Computerized Adaptive Testing. In Proceedings
of the 29th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining . 2279–2289.
[149] Jiasheng Wang. 2022. Graph Embedding Augmented Skill Rating System. IEEE Transactions on Games (2022).
[150] Xinping Wang, Caidie Huang, Jinfang Cai, and Liangyu Chen. 2021. Using knowledge concept aggregation towards
accurate cognitive diagnosis. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge
Management. 2010–2019.
[151] Zhifeng Wang, Wenxing Yan, Chunyan Zeng, Yuan Tian, Shi Dong, et al. 2023. A unified interpretable intelligent
learning diagnosis framework for learning performance prediction in intelligent tutoring systems. International
Journal of Intelligent Systems 2023 (2023).
[152] C Wendler and B Bridgeman. 2014. The Research Foundation for the GRE revised General Test: A compendium of
studies. Educational Testing Service: Princeton, NJ, USA (2014).
[153] Jacob Whitehill, Ting-fan Wu, Jacob Bergsma, Javier Movellan, and Paul Ruvolo. 2009. Whose vote should count
more: Optimal integration of labels from labelers of unknown expertise. Advances in neural information processing
systems 22 (2009).
[154] David J Woodruff and Bradley A Hanson. 1996. Estimation of Item Response Models Using the EM Algorithm for
Finite Mixtures. (1996).
[155] Jinze Wu, Qi Liu, Zhenya Huang, Yuting Ning, Hao Wang, Enhong Chen, Jinfeng Yi, and Bowen Zhou. 2021.
Hierarchical personalized federated learning for user modeling. In Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021 . 957–968.
[156] Mike Wu, Richard L Davis, Benjamin W Domingue, Chris Piech, and Noah Goodman. 2020. Variational item response
theory: Fast, accurate, and expressive. In Proceedings of The 13th International Conference on Educational Data Mining .
257–268.
[157] Runze Wu, Qi Liu, Yuping Liu, Enhong Chen, Yu Su, Zhigang Chen, and Guoping Hu. 2015. Cognitive modelling for
predicting examinee performance. In Twenty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence .
[158] Runze Wu, Guandong Xu, Enhong Chen, Qi Liu, and Wan Ng. 2017. Knowledge or gaming? Cognitive modelling
based on multiple-attempt response. InProceedings of the 26th International Conference on World Wide Web Companion.
321–329.
[159] Xiaolu Xiong, Siyuan Zhao, Eric G Van Inwegen, and Joseph E Beck. 2016. Going deeper with deep knowledge tracing.
International Educational Data Mining Society (2016).
[160] Haowen Yang, Tianlong Qi, Jin Li, Longjiang Guo, Meirui Ren, Lichen Zhang, and Xiaoming Wang. 2022. A novel
quantitative relationship neural network for explainable cognitive diagnosis model. Knowledge-Based Systems 250
(2022), 109156.
[161] Ji Seung Yang, Mark Hansen, and Li Cai. 2012. Characterizing sources of uncertainty in item response theory scale
scores. Educational and psychological measurement 72, 2 (2012), 264–290.
[162] Shangshang Yang, Haiping Ma, Cheng Zhen, Ye Tian, Limiao Zhang, Yaochu Jin, and Xingyi Zhang. 2023. Design-
ing novel cognitive diagnosis models via evolutionary multi-objective neural architecture search. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.04429 (2023).
[163] Shangshang Yang, Cheng Zhen, Ye Tian, Haiping Ma, Yuanchao Liu, Panpan Zhang, and Xingyi Zhang. 2023.
Evolutionary Multi-Objective Neural Architecture Search for Generalized Cognitive Diagnosis Models. In 2023 5th
International Conference on Data-driven Optimization of Complex Systems (DOCS) . IEEE, 1–10.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.

===== PAGE 37 =====

A Survey of Models for Cognitive Diagnosis: New Developments and Future Directions 37
[164] Fangzhou Yao, Qi Liu, Min Hou, Shiwei Tong, Zhenya Huang, Enhong Chen, Jing Sha, and Shijin Wang. 2023.
Exploiting non-interactive exercises in cognitive diagnosis. Interaction 100, 200 (2023), 300.
[165] G Yuzhou and H Qi. 2018. Research on multi direction training and technical analysis of basketball based on BP
neural network model. International Journal for Engineering Modelling 31, 1 (2018), 54–60.
[166] April L Zenisky and Ronald K Hambleton. 2012. Developing test score reports that work: The process and best
practices for effective communication. Educational Measurement: Issues and Practice 31, 2 (2012), 21–26.
[167] Peida Zhan, Hong Jiao, and Dandan Liao. 2018. Cognitive diagnosis modelling incorporating item response times.
Brit. J. Math. Statist. Psych. 71, 2 (2018), 262–286.
[168] Peida Zhan*, Kaiwen Man*, Stefanie A Wind, and Jonathan Malone. 2022. Cognitive diagnosis modeling incorporating
response times and fixation counts: Providing comprehensive feedback and accurate diagnosis. Journal of Educational
and Behavioral Statistics 47, 6 (2022), 736–776.
[169] Dacao Zhang, Kun Zhang, Le Wu, Mi Tian, Richang Hong, and Meng Wang. 2024. Path-Specific Causal Reasoning
for Fairness-aware Cognitive Diagnosis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.03064 (2024).
[170] Jinming Zhang. 2004. Comparison of unidimensional and multidimensional approaches to IRT parameter estimation.
ETS Research Report Series 2004, 2 (2004), i–40.
[171] Junrui Zhang, Yun Mo, Changzhi Chen, and Xiaofeng He. 2021. GKT-CD: Make cognitive diagnosis model enhanced
by graph-based knowledge tracing. In 2021 International joint conference on neural networks (IJCNN) . IEEE, 1–8.
[172] Yunfei Zhang, Chuan Qin, Dazhong Shen, Haiping Ma, Le Zhang, Xingyi Zhang, and Hengshu Zhu. 2023. ReliCD: A
Reliable Cognitive Diagnosis Framework with Confidence Awareness. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Data
Mining (ICDM). IEEE, 858–867.
[173] Zheng Zhang, Le Wu, Qi Liu, Jiayu Liu, Zhenya Huang, Yu Yin, Yan Zhuang, Weibo Gao, and Enhong Chen. 2024.
Understanding and improving fairness in cognitive diagnosis. Science China Information Sciences 67, 5 (2024), 152106.
[174] Kuang Zheng, Ding Shuliang, and Xu Zhiyong. 2010. Application of support vector machine to cognitive diagnosis.
In 2010 Asia-Pacific Conference on Wearable Computing Systems . IEEE, 3–6.
[175] Yuqiang Zhou, Qi Liu, Jinze Wu, Fei Wang, Zhenya Huang, Wei Tong, Hui Xiong, Enhong Chen, and Jianhui Ma.
2021. Modeling context-aware features for cognitive diagnosis in student learning. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM
SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining . 2420–2428.
[176] Chen Zhu, Hengshu Zhu, Hui Xiong, Chao Ma, Fang Xie, Pengliang Ding, and Pan Li. 2018. Person-job fit: Adapting
the right talent for the right job with joint representation learning. ACM Transactions on Management Information
Systems (TMIS) 9, 3 (2018), 1–17.
[177] Yan Zhuang, Qi Liu, Yuting Ning, Weizhe Huang, Rui Lv, Zhenya Huang, Guanhao Zhao, Zheng Zhang, Qingyang
Mao, Shijin Wang, et al. 2023. Efficiently Measuring the Cognitive Ability of LLMs: An Adaptive Testing Perspective.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.10512 (2023).
[178] Yan Zhuang, Qi Liu, GuanHao Zhao, Zhenya Huang, Weizhe Huang, Zachary Pardos, Enhong Chen, Jinze Wu, and
Xin Li. 2023. A Bounded Ability Estimation for Computerized Adaptive Testing. In Thirty-seventh Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems .
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2024.